a certain king had a beautiful garden , and in the garden stood a tree which bore golden apples .
these apples were always counted , and about the time when they began to grow ripe it was found that every night one of them was gone .
the king became very angry at this , and ordered the gardener to keep watch all night under the tree .
the gardener set his eldest son to watch ; but about twelve o"clock he fell asleep , and in the morning another of the apples was missing .
then the second son was ordered to watch ; and at midnight he too fell asleep , and in the morning another apple was gone .
then the third son offered to keep watch ; but the gardener at first would not let him , for fear some harm should come to him : however , at last he consented , and the young man laid himself under the tree to watch .
as the clock struck twelve he heard a rustling noise in the air , and a bird came flying that was of pure gold ; and as it was snapping at one of the apples with its beak , the gardener"s son jumped up and shot an arrow at it .
but the arrow did the bird no harm ; only it dropped a golden feather from its tail , and then flew away .
the golden feather was brought to the king in the morning , and all the council was called together .
everyone agreed that it was worth more than all the wealth of the kingdom : but the king said , " one feather is of no use to me , i must have the whole bird . "
then the gardener"s eldest son set out and thought to find the golden bird very easily ; and when he had gone but a little way , he came to a wood , and by the side of the wood he saw a fox sitting ; so he took his bow and made ready to shoot at it .
then the fox said , " do not shoot me , for i will give you good counsel ; i know what your business is , and that you want to find the golden bird .
you will reach a village in the evening ; and when you get there , you will see two inns opposite to each other , one of which is very pleasant and beautiful to look at : go not in there , but rest for the night in the other , though it may appear to you to be very poor and mean . "
but the son thought to himself , " what can such a beast as this know about the matter ? "
so he shot his arrow at the fox ; but he missed it , and it set up its tail above its back and ran into the wood .
then he went his way , and in the evening came to the village where the two inns were ; and in one of these were people singing , and dancing , and feasting ; but the other looked very dirty , and poor .
" i should be very silly , " said he , " if i went to that shabby house , and left this charming place " ; so he went into the smart house , and ate and drank at his ease , and forgot the bird , and his country too .
time passed on ; and as the eldest son did not come back , and no tidings were heard of him , the second son set out , and the same thing happened to him he met the fox , who gave him the good advice : but when he came to the two inns , his eldest brother was standing at the window where the merrymaking was , and called to him to come in ; and he could not withstand the temptation , but went in , and forgot the golden bird and his country in the same manner .
time passed on again , and the youngest son too wished to set out into the wide world to seek for the golden bird ; but his father would not listen to it for a long while , for he was very fond of his son , and was afraid that some ill luck might happen to him also , and prevent his coming back .
however , at last it was agreed he should go , for he would not rest at home ; and as he came to the wood , he met the fox , and heard the same good counsel .
but he was thankful to the fox , and did not attempt his life as his brothers had done ; so the fox said , " sit upon my tail , and you will travel faster . "
so he sat down , and the fox began to run , and away they went over stock and stone so quick that their hair whistled in the wind .
when they came to the village , the son followed the fox"s counsel , and without looking about him went to the shabby inn and rested there all night at his ease .
in the morning came the fox again and met him as he was beginning his journey , and said , " go straight forward , till you come to a castle , before which lie a whole troop of soldiers fast asleep and snoring : take no notice of them , but go into the castle and pass on and on till you come to a room , where the golden bird sits in a wooden cage ; close by it stands a beautiful golden cage ; but do not try to take the bird out of the shabby cage and put it into the handsome one , otherwise you will repent it . "
then the fox stretched out his tail again , and the young man sat himself down , and away they went over stock and stone till their hair whistled in the wind .
before the castle gate all was as the fox had said : so the son went in and found the chamber where the golden bird hung in a wooden cage , and below stood the golden cage , and the three golden apples that had been lost were lying close by it .
then thought he to himself , " it will be a very droll thing to bring away such a fine bird in this shabby cage " ; so he opened the door and took hold of it and put it into the golden cage .
but the bird set up such a loud scream that all the soldiers awoke , and they took him prisoner and carried him before the king .
the next morning the court sat to judge him ; and when all was heard , it sentenced him to die , unless he should bring the king the golden horse which could run as swiftly as the wind ; and if he did this , he was to have the golden bird given him for his own .
so he set out once more on his journey , sighing , and in great despair , when on a sudden his friend the fox met him , and said , " you see now what has happened on account of your not listening to my counsel .
i will still , however , tell you how to find the golden horse , if you will do as i bid you .
you must go straight on till you come to the castle where the horse stands in his stall : by his side will lie the groom fast asleep and snoring : take away the horse quietly , but be sure to put the old leathern saddle upon him , and not the golden one that is close by it . "
then the son sat down on the fox"s tail , and away they went over stock and stone till their hair whistled in the wind .
all went right , and the groom lay snoring with his hand upon the golden saddle .
but when the son looked at the horse , he thought it a great pity to put the leathern saddle upon it .
" i will give him the good one , " said he ; " i am sure he deserves it . "
as he took up the golden saddle the groom awoke and cried out so loud , that all the guards ran in and took him prisoner , and in the morning he was again brought before the court to be judged , and was sentenced to die .
but it was agreed , that , if he could bring thither the beautiful princess , he should live , and have the bird and the horse given him for his own .
then he went his way very sorrowful ; but the old fox came and said , " why did not you listen to me ?
if you had , you would have carried away both the bird and the horse ; yet will i once more give you counsel .
go straight on , and in the evening you will arrive at a castle .
at twelve o"clock at night the princess goes to the bathing-house : go up to her and give her a kiss , and she will let you lead her away ; but take care you do not suffer her to go and take leave of her father and mother . "
then the fox stretched out his tail , and so away they went over stock and stone till their hair whistled again .
as they came to the castle , all was as the fox had said , and at twelve o"clock the young man met the princess going to the bath and gave her the kiss , and she agreed to run away with him , but begged with many tears that he would let her take leave of her father .
at first he refused , but she wept still more and more , and fell at his feet , till at last he consented ; but the moment she came to her father"s house the guards awoke and he was taken prisoner again .
then he was brought before the king , and the king said , " you shall never have my daughter unless in eight days you dig away the hill that stops the view from my window . "
now this hill was so big that the whole world could not take it away : and when he had worked for seven days , and had done very little , the fox came and said .
" lie down and go to sleep ; i will work for you . "
and in the morning he awoke and the hill was gone ; so he went merrily to the king , and told him that now that it was removed he must give him the princess .
then the king was obliged to keep his word , and away went the young man and the princess ; and the fox came and said to him , " we will have all three , the princess , the horse , and the bird . "
" ah ! " said the young man , " that would be a great thing , but how can you contrive it ? "
" if you will only listen , " said the fox , " it can be done .
when you come to the king , and he asks for the beautiful princess , you must say , " here she is ! " then he will be very joyful ; and you will mount the golden horse that they are to give you , and put out your hand to take leave of them ; but shake hands with the princess last .
then lift her quickly on to the horse behind you ; clap your spurs to his side , and gallop away as fast as you can . "
all went right : then the fox said , " when you come to the castle where the bird is , i will stay with the princess at the door , and you will ride in and speak to the king ; and when he sees that it is the right horse , he will bring out the bird ; but you must sit still , and say that you want to look at it , to see whether it is the true golden bird ; and when you get it into your hand , ride away . "
this , too , happened as the fox said ; they carried off the bird , the princess mounted again , and they rode on to a great wood .
then the fox came , and said , " pray kill me , and cut off my head and my feet . "
but the young man refused to do it : so the fox said , " i will at any rate give you good counsel : beware of two things ; ransom no one from the gallows , and sit down by the side of no river . "
then away he went .
" well , " thought the young man , " it is no hard matter to keep that advice . "
he rode on with the princess , till at last he came to the village where he had left his two brothers .
and there he heard a great noise and uproar ; and when he asked what was the matter , the people said , " two men are going to be hanged . "
as he came nearer , he saw that the two men were his brothers , who had turned robbers ; so he said , " cannot they in any way be saved ? "
but the people said " no , " unless he would bestow all his money upon the rascals and buy their liberty .
then he did not stay to think about the matter , but paid what was asked , and his brothers were given up , and went on with him towards their home .
and as they came to the wood where the fox first met them , it was so cool and pleasant that the two brothers said , " let us sit down by the side of the river , and rest a while , to eat and drink . "
so he said , " yes , " and forgot the fox"s counsel , and sat down on the side of the river ; and while he suspected nothing , they came behind , and threw him down the bank , and took the princess , the horse , and the bird , and went home to the king their master , and said .
" all this have we won by our labour . "
then there was great rejoicing made ; but the horse would not eat , the bird would not sing , and the princess wept .
the youngest son fell to the bottom of the river"s bed : luckily it was nearly dry , but his bones were almost broken , and the bank was so steep that he could find no way to get out .
then the old fox came once more , and scolded him for not following his advice ; otherwise no evil would have befallen him : " yet , " said he , " i cannot leave you here , so lay hold of my tail and hold fast . "
then he pulled him out of the river , and said to him , as he got upon the bank , " your brothers have set watch to kill you , if they find you in the kingdom " so he dressed himself as a poor man , and came secretly to the king"s court , and was scarcely within the doors when the horse began to eat , and the bird to sing , and the princess left off weeping .
then he went to the king , and told him all his brothers " roguery ; and they were seized and punished , and he had the princess given to him again ; and after the king"s death he was heir to his kingdom a long while after , he went to walk one day in the wood , and the old fox met him , and besought him with tears in his eyes to kill him , and cut off his head and feet .
and at last he did so , and in a moment the fox was changed into a man , and turned out to be the brother of the princess , who had been lost a great many many years .
some men are born to good luck : all they do or try to do comes right--all that falls to them is so much gain--all their geese are swans--all their cards are trumps--toss them which way you will , they will always , like poor puss , alight upon their legs , and only move on so much the faster .
the world may very likely not always think of them as they think of themselves , but what care they for the world ? what can it know about the matter ?
one of these lucky beings was neighbour hans .
seven long years he had worked hard for his master .
at last he said , " master , my time is up ; i must go home and see my poor mother once more : so pray pay me my wages and let me go . "
and the master said , " you have been a faithful and good servant , hans , so your pay shall be handsome . "
then he gave him a lump of silver as big as his head .
hans took out his pocket-handkerchief , put the piece of silver into it , threw it over his shoulder , and jogged off on his road homewards .
as he went lazily on , dragging one foot after another , a man came in sight , trotting gaily along on a capital horse .
" ah ! " said hans aloud , " what a fine thing it is to ride on horseback !
there he sits as easy and happy as if he was at home , in the chair by his fireside ; he trips against no stones , saves shoe-leather , and gets on he hardly knows how . "
hans did not speak so softly but the horseman heard it all , and said , " well , friend , why do you go on foot then ? "
" ah ! " said he , " i have this load to carry : to be sure it is silver , but it is so heavy that i can"t hold up my head , and you must know it hurts my shoulder sadly . "
" what do you say of making an exchange ? " said the horseman .
" i will give you my horse , and you shall give me the silver ; which will save you a great deal of trouble in carrying such a heavy load about with you . "
" with all my heart , " said hans : " but as you are so kind to me , i must tell you one thing--you will have a weary task to draw that silver about with you . "
however , the horseman got off , took the silver , helped hans up , gave him the bridle into one hand and the whip into the other , and said , " when you want to go very fast , smack your lips loudly together , and cry " jip ! " " hans was delighted as he sat on the horse , drew himself up , squared his elbows , turned out his toes , cracked his whip , and rode merrily off , one minute whistling a merry tune , and another singing , " no care and no sorrow , a fig for the morrow !
we"ll laugh and be merry , sing neigh down derry ! "
after a time he thought he should like to go a little faster , so he smacked his lips and cried " jip ! "
away went the horse full gallop ; and before hans knew what he was about , he was thrown off , and lay on his back by the road-side .
his horse would have ran off , if a shepherd who was coming by , driving a cow , had not stopped it .
hans soon came to himself , and got upon his legs again , sadly vexed , and said to the shepherd , " this riding is no joke , when a man has the luck to get upon a beast like this that stumbles and flings him off as if it would break his neck .
however , i"m off now once for all : i like your cow now a great deal better than this smart beast that played me this trick , and has spoiled my best coat , you see , in this puddle ; which , by the by , smells not very like a nosegay .
one can walk along at one"s leisure behind that cow--keep good company , and have milk , butter , and cheese , every day , into the bargain .
what would i give to have such a prize ! "
" well , " said the shepherd , " if you are so fond of her , i will change my cow for your horse ; i like to do good to my neighbours , even though i lose by it myself . "
" done ! " said hans , merrily .
" what a noble heart that good man has ! " thought he .
then the shepherd jumped upon the horse , wished hans and the cow good morning , and away he rode .
hans brushed his coat , wiped his face and hands , rested a while , and then drove off his cow quietly , and thought his bargain a very lucky one .
" if i have only a piece of bread ( and i certainly shall always be able to get that ) , i can , whenever i like , eat my butter and cheese with it ; and when i am thirsty i can milk my cow and drink the milk : and what can i wish for more ? "
when he came to an inn , he halted , ate up all his bread , and gave away his last penny for a glass of beer .
when he had rested himself he set off again , driving his cow towards his mother"s village .
but the heat grew greater as soon as noon came on , till at last , as he found himself on a wide heath that would take him more than an hour to cross , he began to be so hot and parched that his tongue clave to the roof of his mouth .
" i can find a cure for this , " thought he ; " now i will milk my cow and quench my thirst " : so he tied her to the stump of a tree , and held his leathern cap to milk into ; but not a drop was to be had .
who would have thought that this cow , which was to bring him milk and butter and cheese , was all that time utterly dry ?
hans had not thought of looking to that .
while he was trying his luck in milking , and managing the matter very clumsily , the uneasy beast began to think him very troublesome ; and at last gave him such a kick on the head as knocked him down ; and there he lay a long while senseless .
luckily a butcher soon came by , driving a pig in a wheelbarrow .
" what is the matter with you , my man ? " said the butcher , as he helped him up .
hans told him what had happened , how he was dry , and wanted to milk his cow , but found the cow was dry too .
then the butcher gave him a flask of ale , saying , " there , drink and refresh yourself ; your cow will give you no milk : don"t you see she is an old beast , good for nothing but the slaughter-house ? "
" alas , alas ! " said hans , " who would have thought it ?
what a shame to take my horse , and give me only a dry cow !
if i kill her , what will she be good for ?
i hate cow-beef ; it is not tender enough for me .
if it were a pig now--like that fat gentleman you are driving along at his ease--one could do something with it ; it would at any rate make sausages . "
" well , " said the butcher , " i don"t like to say no , when one is asked to do a kind , neighbourly thing .
to please you i will change , and give you my fine fat pig for the cow . "
" heaven reward you for your kindness and self-denial ! " said hans , as he gave the butcher the cow ; and taking the pig off the wheel-barrow , drove it away , holding it by the string that was tied to its leg .
so on he jogged , and all seemed now to go right with him : he had met with some misfortunes , to be sure ; but he was now well repaid for all .
how could it be otherwise with such a travelling companion as he had at last got ?
the next man he met was a countryman carrying a fine white goose .
the countryman stopped to ask what was o"clock ; this led to further chat ; and hans told him all his luck , how he had so many good bargains , and how all the world went gay and smiling with him the countryman then began to tell his tale , and said he was going to take the goose to a christening .
" feel , " said he , " how heavy it is , and yet it is only eight weeks old .
whoever roasts and eats it will find plenty of fat upon it , it has lived so well ! "
" you"re right , " said hans , as he weighed it in his hand ; " but if you talk of fat , my pig is no trifle . "
meantime the countryman began to look grave , and shook his head .
" hark ye ! " said he , " my worthy friend , you seem a good sort of fellow , so i can"t help doing you a kind turn .
your pig may get you into a scrape .
in the village i just came from , the squire has had a pig stolen out of his sty .
i was dreadfully afraid when i saw you that you had got the squire"s pig .
if you have , and they catch you , it will be a bad job for you .
the least they will do will be to throw you into the horse-pond .
can you swim ? "
poor hans was sadly frightened .
" good man , " cried he , " pray get me out of this scrape .
i know nothing of where the pig was either bred or born ; but he may have been the squire"s for aught i can tell : you know this country better than i do , take my pig and give me the goose . "
" i ought to have something into the bargain , " said the countryman ; " give a fat goose for a pig , indeed !
" tis not everyone would do so much for you as that .
however , i will not be hard upon you , as you are in trouble . "
then he took the string in his hand , and drove off the pig by a side path ; while hans went on the way homewards free from care .
" after all , " thought he , " that chap is pretty well taken in .
i don"t care whose pig it is , but wherever it came from it has been a very good friend to me .
i have much the best of the bargain .
first there will be a capital roast ; then the fat will find me in goose-grease for six months ; and then there are all the beautiful white feathers .
i will put them into my pillow , and then i am sure i shall sleep soundly without rocking .
how happy my mother will be !
talk of a pig , indeed !
give me a fine fat goose . "
as he came to the next village , he saw a scissor-grinder with his wheel , working and singing , " o"er hill and o"er dale so happy i roam , work light and live well , all the world is my home ; then who so blythe , so merry as i ? "
hans stood looking on for a while , and at last said , " you must be well off , master grinder ! you seem so happy at your work . "
" yes , " said the other , " mine is a golden trade ; a good grinder never puts his hand into his pocket without finding money in it--but where did you get that beautiful goose ? "
" i did not buy it , i gave a pig for it . "
" and where did you get the pig ? "
" i gave a cow for it . "
" and the cow ? "
" i gave a horse for it . "
" and the horse ? "
" i gave a lump of silver as big as my head for it . "
" and the silver ? "
" oh !
i worked hard for that seven long years . "
" you have thriven well in the world hitherto , " said the grinder , " now if you could find money in your pocket whenever you put your hand in it , your fortune would be made . "
" very true : but how is that to be managed ? "
" how ?
why , you must turn grinder like myself , " said the other ; " you only want a grindstone ; the rest will come of itself .
here is one that is but little the worse for wear : i would not ask more than the value of your goose for it--will you buy ? "
" how can you ask ? " said hans ; " i should be the happiest man in the world , if i could have money whenever i put my hand in my pocket : what could i want more ? there"s the goose . "
" now , " said the grinder , as he gave him a common rough stone that lay by his side , " this is a most capital stone ; do but work it well enough , and you can make an old nail cut with it . "
hans took the stone , and went his way with a light heart : his eyes sparkled for joy , and he said to himself , " surely i must have been born in a lucky hour ; everything i could want or wish for comes of itself .
people are so kind ; they seem really to think i do them a favour in letting them make me rich , and giving me good bargains . "
meantime he began to be tired , and hungry too , for he had given away his last penny in his joy at getting the cow .
at last he could go no farther , for the stone tired him sadly : and he dragged himself to the side of a river , that he might take a drink of water , and rest a while .
so he laid the stone carefully by his side on the bank : but , as he stooped down to drink , he forgot it , pushed it a little , and down it rolled , plump into the stream for a while he watched it sinking in the deep clear water ; then sprang up and danced for joy , and again fell upon his knees and thanked heaven , with tears in his eyes , for its kindness in taking away his only plague , the ugly heavy stone .
" how happy am i ! " cried he ; " nobody was ever so lucky as i . "
then up he got with a light heart , free from all his troubles , and walked on till he reached his mother"s house , and told her how very easy the road to good luck was .
there was once an old castle , that stood in the middle of a deep gloomy wood , and in the castle lived an old fairy .
now this fairy could take any shape she pleased .
all the day long she flew about in the form of an owl , or crept about the country like a cat ; but at night she always became an old woman again .
when any young man came within a hundred paces of her castle , he became quite fixed , and could not move a step till she came and set him free ; which she would not do till he had given her his word never to come there again : but when any pretty maiden came within that space she was changed into a bird , and the fairy put her into a cage , and hung her up in a chamber in the castle .
there were seven hundred of these cages hanging in the castle , and all with beautiful birds in them now there was once a maiden whose name was jorinda .
she was prettier than all the pretty girls that ever were seen before , and a shepherd lad , whose name was jorindel , was very fond of her , and they were soon to be married .
one day they went to walk in the wood , that they might be alone ; and jorindel said , " we must take care that we don"t go too near to the fairy"s castle . "
it was a beautiful evening ; the last rays of the setting sun shone bright through the long stems of the trees upon the green underwood beneath , and the turtle-doves sang from the tall birches .
jorinda sat down to gaze upon the sun ; jorindel sat by her side ; and both felt sad , they knew not why ; but it seemed as if they were to be parted from one another for ever .
they had wandered a long way ; and when they looked to see which way they should go home , they found themselves at a loss to know what path to take .
the sun was setting fast , and already half of its circle had sunk behind the hill : jorindel on a sudden looked behind him , and saw through the bushes that they had , without knowing it , sat down close under the old walls of the castle .
then he shrank for fear , turned pale , and trembled .
jorinda was just singing , " the ring-dove sang from the willow spray , well-a-day !
well-a-day !
he mourn"d for the fate of his darling mate , well-a-day ! " when her song stopped suddenly .
jorindel turned to see the reason , and beheld his jorinda changed into a nightingale , so that her song ended with a mournful _ jug , jug _ .
an owl with fiery eyes flew three times round them , and three times screamed : " tu whu !
tu whu !
tu whu ! "
jorindel could not move ; he stood fixed as a stone , and could neither weep , nor speak , nor stir hand or foot .
and now the sun went quite down ; the gloomy night came ; the owl flew into a bush ; and a moment after the old fairy came forth pale and meagre , with staring eyes , and a nose and chin that almost met one another .
she mumbled something to herself , seized the nightingale , and went away with it in her hand .
poor jorindel saw the nightingale was gone--but what could he do ?
he could not speak , he could not move from the spot where he stood .
at last the fairy came back and sang with a hoarse voice : " till the prisoner is fast , and her doom is cast , there stay !
oh , stay !
when the charm is around her , and the spell has bound her , hie away ! away ! "
on a sudden jorindel found himself free .
then he fell on his knees before the fairy , and prayed her to give him back his dear jorinda : but she laughed at him , and said he should never see her again ; then she went her way .
he prayed , he wept , he sorrowed , but all in vain .
" alas ! " he said , " what will become of me ? "
he could not go back to his own home , so he went to a strange village , and employed himself in keeping sheep .
many a time did he walk round and round as near to the hated castle as he dared go , but all in vain ; he heard or saw nothing of jorinda .
at last he dreamt one night that he found a beautiful purple flower , and that in the middle of it lay a costly pearl ; and he dreamt that he plucked the flower , and went with it in his hand into the castle , and that everything he touched with it was disenchanted , and that there he found his jorinda again .
in the morning when he awoke , he began to search over hill and dale for this pretty flower ; and eight long days he sought for it in vain : but on the ninth day , early in the morning , he found the beautiful purple flower ; and in the middle of it was a large dewdrop , as big as a costly pearl .
then he plucked the flower , and set out and travelled day and night , till he came again to the castle .
he walked nearer than a hundred paces to it , and yet he did not become fixed as before , but found that he could go quite close up to the door .
jorindel was very glad indeed to see this .
then he touched the door with the flower , and it sprang open ; so that he went in through the court , and listened when he heard so many birds singing .
at last he came to the chamber where the fairy sat , with the seven hundred birds singing in the seven hundred cages .
when she saw jorindel she was very angry , and screamed with rage ; but she could not come within two yards of him , for the flower he held in his hand was his safeguard .
he looked around at the birds , but alas ! there were many , many nightingales , and how then should he find out which was his jorinda ?
while he was thinking what to do , he saw the fairy had taken down one of the cages , and was making the best of her way off through the door .
he ran or flew after her , touched the cage with the flower , and jorinda stood before him , and threw her arms round his neck looking as beautiful as ever , as beautiful as when they walked together in the wood .
then he touched all the other birds with the flower , so that they all took their old forms again ; and he took jorinda home , where they were married , and lived happily together many years : and so did a good many other lads , whose maidens had been forced to sing in the old fairy"s cages by themselves , much longer than they liked .
an honest farmer had once an ass that had been a faithful servant to him a great many years , but was now growing old and every day more and more unfit for work .
his master therefore was tired of keeping him and began to think of putting an end to him ; but the ass , who saw that some mischief was in the wind , took himself slyly off , and began his journey towards the great city , " for there , " thought he , " i may turn musician . "
after he had travelled a little way , he spied a dog lying by the roadside and panting as if he were tired .
" what makes you pant so , my friend ? " said the ass .
" alas ! " said the dog , " my master was going to knock me on the head , because i am old and weak , and can no longer make myself useful to him in hunting ; so i ran away ; but what can i do to earn my livelihood ? "
" hark ye ! " said the ass , " i am going to the great city to turn musician : suppose you go with me , and try what you can do in the same way ? "
the dog said he was willing , and they jogged on together .
they had not gone far before they saw a cat sitting in the middle of the road and making a most rueful face .
" pray , my good lady , " said the ass , " what"s the matter with you ?
you look quite out of spirits ! "
" ah , me ! " said the cat , " how can one be in good spirits when one"s life is in danger ?
because i am beginning to grow old , and had rather lie at my ease by the fire than run about the house after the mice , my mistress laid hold of me , and was going to drown me ; and though i have been lucky enough to get away from her , i do not know what i am to live upon . "
" oh , " said the ass , " by all means go with us to the great city ; you are a good night singer , and may make your fortune as a musician . "
the cat was pleased with the thought , and joined the party .
soon afterwards , as they were passing by a farmyard , they saw a cock perched upon a gate , and screaming out with all his might and main .
" bravo ! " said the ass ; " upon my word , you make a famous noise ; pray what is all this about ? "
" why , " said the cock , " i was just now saying that we should have fine weather for our washing-day , and yet my mistress and the cook don"t thank me for my pains , but threaten to cut off my head tomorrow , and make broth of me for the guests that are coming on sunday ! "
" heaven forbid ! " said the ass , " come with us master chanticleer ; it will be better , at any rate , than staying here to have your head cut off !
besides , who knows ?
if we care to sing in tune , we may get up some kind of a concert ; so come along with us . "
" with all my heart , " said the cock : so they all four went on jollily together .
they could not , however , reach the great city the first day ; so when night came on , they went into a wood to sleep .
the ass and the dog laid themselves down under a great tree , and the cat climbed up into the branches ; while the cock , thinking that the higher he sat the safer he should be , flew up to the very top of the tree , and then , according to his custom , before he went to sleep , looked out on all sides of him to see that everything was well .
in doing this , he saw afar off something bright and shining and calling to his companions said , " there must be a house no great way off , for i see a light . "
" if that be the case , " said the ass , " we had better change our quarters , for our lodging is not the best in the world ! "
" besides , " added the dog , " i should not be the worse for a bone or two , or a bit of meat . "
so they walked off together towards the spot where chanticleer had seen the light , and as they drew near it became larger and brighter , till they at last came close to a house in which a gang of robbers lived .
the ass , being the tallest of the company , marched up to the window and peeped in .
" well , donkey , " said chanticleer , " what do you see ? "
" what do i see ? " replied the ass .
" why , i see a table spread with all kinds of good things , and robbers sitting round it making merry . "
" that would be a noble lodging for us , " said the cock .
" yes , " said the ass , " if we could only get in " ; so they consulted together how they should contrive to get the robbers out ; and at last they hit upon a plan .
the ass placed himself upright on his hind legs , with his forefeet resting against the window ; the dog got upon his back ; the cat scrambled up to the dog"s shoulders , and the cock flew up and sat upon the cat"s head .
when all was ready a signal was given , and they began their music .
the ass brayed , the dog barked , the cat mewed , and the cock screamed ; and then they all broke through the window at once , and came tumbling into the room , amongst the broken glass , with a most hideous clatter !
the robbers , who had been not a little frightened by the opening concert , had now no doubt that some frightful hobgoblin had broken in upon them , and scampered away as fast as they could .
the coast once clear , our travellers soon sat down and dispatched what the robbers had left , with as much eagerness as if they had not expected to eat again for a month .
as soon as they had satisfied themselves , they put out the lights , and each once more sought out a resting-place to his own liking .
the donkey laid himself down upon a heap of straw in the yard , the dog stretched himself upon a mat behind the door , the cat rolled herself up on the hearth before the warm ashes , and the cock perched upon a beam on the top of the house ; and , as they were all rather tired with their journey , they soon fell asleep .
but about midnight , when the robbers saw from afar that the lights were out and that all seemed quiet , they began to think that they had been in too great a hurry to run away ; and one of them , who was bolder than the rest , went to see what was going on .
finding everything still , he marched into the kitchen , and groped about till he found a match in order to light a candle ; and then , espying the glittering fiery eyes of the cat , he mistook them for live coals , and held the match to them to light it .
but the cat , not understanding this joke , sprang at his face , and spat , and scratched at him this frightened him dreadfully , and away he ran to the back door ; but there the dog jumped up and bit him in the leg ; and as he was crossing over the yard the ass kicked him ; and the cock , who had been awakened by the noise , crowed with all his might .
at this the robber ran back as fast as he could to his comrades , and told the captain how a horrid witch had got into the house , and had spat at him and scratched his face with her long bony fingers ; how a man with a knife in his hand had hidden himself behind the door , and stabbed him in the leg ; how a black monster stood in the yard and struck him with a club , and how the devil had sat upon the top of the house and cried out , " throw the rascal up here ! "
after this the robbers never dared to go back to the house ; but the musicians were so pleased with their quarters that they took up their abode there ; and there they are , i dare say , at this very day .
a shepherd had a faithful dog , called sultan , who was grown very old , and had lost all his teeth .
and one day when the shepherd and his wife were standing together before the house the shepherd said , " i will shoot old sultan tomorrow morning , for he is of no use now . "
but his wife said , " pray let the poor faithful creature live ; he has served us well a great many years , and we ought to give him a livelihood for the rest of his days . "
" but what can we do with him ? " said the shepherd , " he has not a tooth in his head , and the thieves don"t care for him at all ; to be sure he has served us , but then he did it to earn his livelihood ; tomorrow shall be his last day , depend upon it . "
poor sultan , who was lying close by them , heard all that the shepherd and his wife said to one another , and was very much frightened to think tomorrow would be his last day ; so in the evening he went to his good friend the wolf , who lived in the wood , and told him all his sorrows , and how his master meant to kill him in the morning .
" make yourself easy , " said the wolf , " i will give you some good advice .
your master , you know , goes out every morning very early with his wife into the field ; and they take their little child with them , and lay it down behind the hedge in the shade while they are at work .
now do you lie down close by the child , and pretend to be watching it , and i will come out of the wood and run away with it ; you must run after me as fast as you can , and i will let it drop ; then you may carry it back , and they will think you have saved their child , and will be so thankful to you that they will take care of you as long as you live . "
the dog liked this plan very well ; and accordingly so it was managed .
the wolf ran with the child a little way ; the shepherd and his wife screamed out ; but sultan soon overtook him , and carried the poor little thing back to his master and mistress .
then the shepherd patted him on the head , and said , " old sultan has saved our child from the wolf , and therefore he shall live and be well taken care of , and have plenty to eat .
wife , go home , and give him a good dinner , and let him have my old cushion to sleep on as long as he lives . "
so from this time forward sultan had all that he could wish for .
soon afterwards the wolf came and wished him joy , and said , " now , my good fellow , you must tell no tales , but turn your head the other way when i want to taste one of the old shepherd"s fine fat sheep . "
" no , " said the sultan ; " i will be true to my master . "
however , the wolf thought he was in joke , and came one night to get a dainty morsel .
but sultan had told his master what the wolf meant to do ; so he laid wait for him behind the barn door , and when the wolf was busy looking out for a good fat sheep , he had a stout cudgel laid about his back , that combed his locks for him finely .
then the wolf was very angry , and called sultan " an old rogue , " and swore he would have his revenge .
so the next morning the wolf sent the boar to challenge sultan to come into the wood to fight the matter .
now sultan had nobody he could ask to be his second but the shepherd"s old three-legged cat ; so he took her with him , and as the poor thing limped along with some trouble , she stuck up her tail straight in the air .
the wolf and the wild boar were first on the ground ; and when they espied their enemies coming , and saw the cat"s long tail standing straight in the air , they thought she was carrying a sword for sultan to fight with ; and every time she limped , they thought she was picking up a stone to throw at them ; so they said they should not like this way of fighting , and the boar lay down behind a bush , and the wolf jumped up into a tree .
sultan and the cat soon came up , and looked about and wondered that no one was there .
the boar , however , had not quite hidden himself , for his ears stuck out of the bush ; and when he shook one of them a little , the cat , seeing something move , and thinking it was a mouse , sprang upon it , and bit and scratched it , so that the boar jumped up and grunted , and ran away , roaring out , " look up in the tree , there sits the one who is to blame . "
so they looked up , and espied the wolf sitting amongst the branches ; and they called him a cowardly rascal , and would not suffer him to come down till he was heartily ashamed of himself , and had promised to be good friends again with old sultan .
in a village dwelt a poor old woman , who had gathered together a dish of beans and wanted to cook them so she made a fire on her hearth , and that it might burn the quicker , she lighted it with a handful of straw .
when she was emptying the beans into the pan , one dropped without her observing it , and lay on the ground beside a straw , and soon afterwards a burning coal from the fire leapt down to the two .
then the straw began and said : " dear friends , from whence do you come here ? "
the coal replied : " i fortunately sprang out of the fire , and if i had not escaped by sheer force , my death would have been certain,--i should have been burnt to ashes . "
the bean said : " i too have escaped with a whole skin , but if the old woman had got me into the pan , i should have been made into broth without any mercy , like my comrades . "
" and would a better fate have fallen to my lot ? " said the straw .
" the old woman has destroyed all my brethren in fire and smoke ; she seized sixty of them at once , and took their lives .
i luckily slipped through her fingers . "
" but what are we to do now ? " said the coal .
" i think , " answered the bean , " that as we have so fortunately escaped death , we should keep together like good companions , and lest a new mischance should overtake us here , we should go away together , and repair to a foreign country . "
the proposition pleased the two others , and they set out on their way together .
soon , however , they came to a little brook , and as there was no bridge or foot-plank , they did not know how they were to get over it .
the straw hit on a good idea , and said : " i will lay myself straight across , and then you can walk over on me as on a bridge . "
the straw therefore stretched itself from one bank to the other , and the coal , who was of an impetuous disposition , tripped quite boldly on to the newly-built bridge .
but when she had reached the middle , and heard the water rushing beneath her , she was after all , afraid , and stood still , and ventured no farther .
the straw , however , began to burn , broke in two pieces , and fell into the stream the coal slipped after her , hissed when she got into the water , and breathed her last .
the bean , who had prudently stayed behind on the shore , could not but laugh at the event , was unable to stop , and laughed so heartily that she burst .
it would have been all over with her , likewise , if , by good fortune , a tailor who was travelling in search of work , had not sat down to rest by the brook .
as he had a compassionate heart he pulled out his needle and thread , and sewed her together .
the bean thanked him most prettily , but as the tailor used black thread , all beans since then have a black seam
a king and queen once upon a time reigned in a country a great way off , where there were in those days fairies .
now this king and queen had plenty of money , and plenty of fine clothes to wear , and plenty of good things to eat and drink , and a coach to ride out in every day : but though they had been married many years they had no children , and this grieved them very much indeed .
but one day as the queen was walking by the side of the river , at the bottom of the garden , she saw a poor little fish , that had thrown itself out of the water , and lay gasping and nearly dead on the bank .
then the queen took pity on the little fish , and threw it back again into the river ; and before it swam away it lifted its head out of the water and said , " i know what your wish is , and it shall be fulfilled , in return for your kindness to me--you will soon have a daughter . "
what the little fish had foretold soon came to pass ; and the queen had a little girl , so very beautiful that the king could not cease looking on it for joy , and said he would hold a great feast and make merry , and show the child to all the land .
so he asked his kinsmen , and nobles , and friends , and neighbours .
but the queen said , " i will have the fairies also , that they might be kind and good to our little daughter . "
now there were thirteen fairies in the kingdom ; but as the king and queen had only twelve golden dishes for them to eat out of , they were forced to leave one of the fairies without asking her .
so twelve fairies came , each with a high red cap on her head , and red shoes with high heels on her feet , and a long white wand in her hand : and after the feast was over they gathered round in a ring and gave all their best gifts to the little princess .
one gave her goodness , another beauty , another riches , and so on till she had all that was good in the world .
just as eleven of them had done blessing her , a great noise was heard in the courtyard , and word was brought that the thirteenth fairy was come , with a black cap on her head , and black shoes on her feet , and a broomstick in her hand : and presently up she came into the dining-hall .
now , as she had not been asked to the feast she was very angry , and scolded the king and queen very much , and set to work to take her revenge .
so she cried out , " the king"s daughter shall , in her fifteenth year , be wounded by a spindle , and fall down dead . "
then the twelfth of the friendly fairies , who had not yet given her gift , came forward , and said that the evil wish must be fulfilled , but that she could soften its mischief ; so her gift was , that the king"s daughter , when the spindle wounded her , should not really die , but should only fall asleep for a hundred years .
however , the king hoped still to save his dear child altogether from the threatened evil ; so he ordered that all the spindles in the kingdom should be bought up and burnt .
but all the gifts of the first eleven fairies were in the meantime fulfilled ; for the princess was so beautiful , and well behaved , and good , and wise , that everyone who knew her loved her .
it happened that , on the very day she was fifteen years old , the king and queen were not at home , and she was left alone in the palace .
so she roved about by herself , and looked at all the rooms and chambers , till at last she came to an old tower , to which there was a narrow staircase ending with a little door .
in the door there was a golden key , and when she turned it the door sprang open , and there sat an old lady spinning away very busily .
" why , how now , good mother , " said the princess ; " what are you doing there ? "
" spinning , " said the old lady , and nodded her head , humming a tune , while buzz ! went the wheel .
" how prettily that little thing turns round ! " said the princess , and took the spindle and began to try and spin .
but scarcely had she touched it , before the fairy"s prophecy was fulfilled ; the spindle wounded her , and she fell down lifeless on the ground .
however , she was not dead , but had only fallen into a deep sleep ; and the king and the queen , who had just come home , and all their court , fell asleep too ; and the horses slept in the stables , and the dogs in the court , the pigeons on the house-top , and the very flies slept upon the walls .
even the fire on the hearth left off blazing , and went to sleep ; the jack stopped , and the spit that was turning about with a goose upon it for the king"s dinner stood still ; and the cook , who was at that moment pulling the kitchen-boy by the hair to give him a box on the ear for something he had done amiss , let him go , and both fell asleep ; the butler , who was slyly tasting the ale , fell asleep with the jug at his lips : and thus everything stood still , and slept soundly .
a large hedge of thorns soon grew round the palace , and every year it became higher and thicker ; till at last the old palace was surrounded and hidden , so that not even the roof or the chimneys could be seen .
but there went a report through all the land of the beautiful sleeping briar rose ( for so the king"s daughter was called ) : so that , from time to time , several kings " sons came , and tried to break through the thicket into the palace .
this , however , none of them could ever do ; for the thorns and bushes laid hold of them , as it were with hands ; and there they stuck fast , and died wretchedly .
after many , many years there came a king"s son into that land : and an old man told him the story of the thicket of thorns ; and how a beautiful palace stood behind it , and how a wonderful princess , called briar rose , lay in it asleep , with all her court .
he told , too , how he had heard from his grandfather that many , many princes had come , and had tried to break through the thicket , but that they had all stuck fast in it , and died .
then the young prince said , " all this shall not frighten me ; i will go and see this briar rose . "
the old man tried to hinder him , but he was bent upon going .
now that very day the hundred years were ended ; and as the prince came to the thicket he saw nothing but beautiful flowering shrubs , through which he went with ease , and they shut in after him as thick as ever .
then he came at last to the palace , and there in the court lay the dogs asleep ; and the horses were standing in the stables ; and on the roof sat the pigeons fast asleep , with their heads under their wings .
and when he came into the palace , the flies were sleeping on the walls ; the spit was standing still ; the butler had the jug of ale at his lips , going to drink a draught ; the maid sat with a fowl in her lap ready to be plucked ; and the cook in the kitchen was still holding up her hand , as if she was going to beat the boy .
then he went on still farther , and all was so still that he could hear every breath he drew ; till at last he came to the old tower , and opened the door of the little room in which briar rose was ; and there she lay , fast asleep on a couch by the window .
she looked so beautiful that he could not take his eyes off her , so he stooped down and gave her a kiss .
but the moment he kissed her she opened her eyes and awoke , and smiled upon him ; and they went out together ; and soon the king and queen also awoke , and all the court , and gazed on each other with great wonder .
and the horses shook themselves , and the dogs jumped up and barked ; the pigeons took their heads from under their wings , and looked about and flew into the fields ; the flies on the walls buzzed again ; the fire in the kitchen blazed up ; round went the jack , and round went the spit , with the goose for the king"s dinner upon it ; the butler finished his draught of ale ; the maid went on plucking the fowl ; and the cook gave the boy the box on his ear .
and then the prince and briar rose were married , and the wedding feast was given ; and they lived happily together all their lives long .
a shepherd"s dog had a master who took no care of him , but often let him suffer the greatest hunger .
at last he could bear it no longer ; so he took to his heels , and off he ran in a very sad and sorrowful mood .
on the road he met a sparrow that said to him , " why are you so sad , my friend ? "
" because , " said the dog , " i am very very hungry , and have nothing to eat . "
" if that be all , " answered the sparrow , " come with me into the next town , and i will soon find you plenty of food . "
so on they went together into the town : and as they passed by a butcher"s shop , the sparrow said to the dog , " stand there a little while till i peck you down a piece of meat . "
so the sparrow perched upon the shelf : and having first looked carefully about her to see if anyone was watching her , she pecked and scratched at a steak that lay upon the edge of the shelf , till at last down it fell .
then the dog snapped it up , and scrambled away with it into a corner , where he soon ate it all up .
" well , " said the sparrow , " you shall have some more if you will ; so come with me to the next shop , and i will peck you down another steak . "
when the dog had eaten this too , the sparrow said to him , " well , my good friend , have you had enough now ? "
" i have had plenty of meat , " answered he , " but i should like to have a piece of bread to eat after it . "
" come with me then , " said the sparrow , " and you shall soon have that too . "
so she took him to a baker"s shop , and pecked at two rolls that lay in the window , till they fell down : and as the dog still wished for more , she took him to another shop and pecked down some more for him when that was eaten , the sparrow asked him whether he had had enough now .
" yes , " said he ; " and now let us take a walk a little way out of the town . "
so they both went out upon the high road ; but as the weather was warm , they had not gone far before the dog said , " i am very much tired--i should like to take a nap . "
" very well , " answered the sparrow , " do so , and in the meantime i will perch upon that bush . "
so the dog stretched himself out on the road , and fell fast asleep .
whilst he slept , there came by a carter with a cart drawn by three horses , and loaded with two casks of wine .
the sparrow , seeing that the carter did not turn out of the way , but would go on in the track in which the dog lay , so as to drive over him , called out , " stop ! stop !
mr carter , or it shall be the worse for you . "
but the carter , grumbling to himself , " you make it the worse for me , indeed ! what can you do ? " cracked his whip , and drove his cart over the poor dog , so that the wheels crushed him to death .
" there , " cried the sparrow , " thou cruel villain , thou hast killed my friend the dog .
now mind what i say .
this deed of thine shall cost thee all thou art worth . "
" do your worst , and welcome , " said the brute , " what harm can you do me ? " and passed on .
but the sparrow crept under the tilt of the cart , and pecked at the bung of one of the casks till she loosened it ; and then all the wine ran out , without the carter seeing it .
at last he looked round , and saw that the cart was dripping , and the cask quite empty .
" what an unlucky wretch i am ! " cried he .
" not wretch enough yet ! " said the sparrow , as she alighted upon the head of one of the horses , and pecked at him till he reared up and kicked .
when the carter saw this , he drew out his hatchet and aimed a blow at the sparrow , meaning to kill her ; but she flew away , and the blow fell upon the poor horse"s head with such force , that he fell down dead .
" unlucky wretch that i am ! " cried he .
" not wretch enough yet ! " said the sparrow .
and as the carter went on with the other two horses , she again crept under the tilt of the cart , and pecked out the bung of the second cask , so that all the wine ran out .
when the carter saw this , he again cried out , " miserable wretch that i am ! "
but the sparrow answered , " not wretch enough yet ! " and perched on the head of the second horse , and pecked at him too .
the carter ran up and struck at her again with his hatchet ; but away she flew , and the blow fell upon the second horse and killed him on the spot .
" unlucky wretch that i am ! " said he .
" not wretch enough yet ! " said the sparrow ; and perching upon the third horse , she began to peck him too .
the carter was mad with fury ; and without looking about him , or caring what he was about , struck again at the sparrow ; but killed his third horse as he done the other two .
" alas ! miserable wretch that i am ! " cried he .
" not wretch enough yet ! " answered the sparrow as she flew away ; " now will i plague and punish thee at thy own house . "
the carter was forced at last to leave his cart behind him , and to go home overflowing with rage and vexation .
" alas ! " said he to his wife , " what ill luck has befallen me!--my wine is all spilt , and my horses all three dead . "
" alas ! husband , " replied she , " and a wicked bird has come into the house , and has brought with her all the birds in the world , i am sure , and they have fallen upon our corn in the loft , and are eating it up at such a rate ! "
away ran the husband upstairs , and saw thousands of birds sitting upon the floor eating up his corn , with the sparrow in the midst of them " unlucky wretch that i am ! " cried the carter ; for he saw that the corn was almost all gone .
" not wretch enough yet ! " said the sparrow ; " thy cruelty shall cost thee thy life yet ! " and away she flew .
the carter seeing that he had thus lost all that he had , went down into his kitchen ; and was still not sorry for what he had done , but sat himself angrily and sulkily in the chimney corner .
but the sparrow sat on the outside of the window , and cried " carter ! thy cruelty shall cost thee thy life ! "
with that he jumped up in a rage , seized his hatchet , and threw it at the sparrow ; but it missed her , and only broke the window .
the sparrow now hopped in , perched upon the window-seat , and cried , " carter ! it shall cost thee thy life ! "
then he became mad and blind with rage , and struck the window-seat with such force that he cleft it in two : and as the sparrow flew from place to place , the carter and his wife were so furious , that they broke all their furniture , glasses , chairs , benches , the table , and at last the walls , without touching the bird at all .
in the end , however , they caught her : and the wife said , " shall i kill her at once ? "
" no , " cried he , " that is letting her off too easily : she shall die a much more cruel death ; i will eat her . "
but the sparrow began to flutter about , and stretch out her neck and cried , " carter ! it shall cost thee thy life yet ! "
with that he could wait no longer : so he gave his wife the hatchet , and cried , " wife , strike at the bird and kill her in my hand . "
and the wife struck ; but she missed her aim , and hit her husband on the head so that he fell down dead , and the sparrow flew quietly home to her nest .
there was a king who had twelve beautiful daughters .
they slept in twelve beds all in one room ; and when they went to bed , the doors were shut and locked up ; but every morning their shoes were found to be quite worn through as if they had been danced in all night ; and yet nobody could find out how it happened , or where they had been .
then the king made it known to all the land , that if any person could discover the secret , and find out where it was that the princesses danced in the night , he should have the one he liked best for his wife , and should be king after his death ; but whoever tried and did not succeed , after three days and nights , should be put to death .
a king"s son soon came .
he was well entertained , and in the evening was taken to the chamber next to the one where the princesses lay in their twelve beds .
there he was to sit and watch where they went to dance ; and , in order that nothing might pass without his hearing it , the door of his chamber was left open .
but the king"s son soon fell asleep ; and when he awoke in the morning he found that the princesses had all been dancing , for the soles of their shoes were full of holes .
the same thing happened the second and third night : so the king ordered his head to be cut off .
after him came several others ; but they had all the same luck , and all lost their lives in the same manner .
now it chanced that an old soldier , who had been wounded in battle and could fight no longer , passed through the country where this king reigned : and as he was travelling through a wood , he met an old woman , who asked him where he was going .
" i hardly know where i am going , or what i had better do , " said the soldier ; " but i think i should like very well to find out where it is that the princesses dance , and then in time i might be a king . "
" well , " said the old dame , " that is no very hard task : only take care not to drink any of the wine which one of the princesses will bring to you in the evening ; and as soon as she leaves you pretend to be fast asleep . "
then she gave him a cloak , and said , " as soon as you put that on you will become invisible , and you will then be able to follow the princesses wherever they go . "
when the soldier heard all this good counsel , he determined to try his luck : so he went to the king , and said he was willing to undertake the task .
he was as well received as the others had been , and the king ordered fine royal robes to be given him ; and when the evening came he was led to the outer chamber .
just as he was going to lie down , the eldest of the princesses brought him a cup of wine ; but the soldier threw it all away secretly , taking care not to drink a drop .
then he laid himself down on his bed , and in a little while began to snore very loud as if he was fast asleep .
when the twelve princesses heard this they laughed heartily ; and the eldest said , " this fellow too might have done a wiser thing than lose his life in this way ! "
then they rose up and opened their drawers and boxes , and took out all their fine clothes , and dressed themselves at the glass , and skipped about as if they were eager to begin dancing .
but the youngest said , " i don"t know how it is , while you are so happy i feel very uneasy ; i am sure some mischance will befall us . "
" you simpleton , " said the eldest , " you are always afraid ; have you forgotten how many kings " sons have already watched in vain ?
and as for this soldier , even if i had not given him his sleeping draught , he would have slept soundly enough . "
when they were all ready , they went and looked at the soldier ; but he snored on , and did not stir hand or foot : so they thought they were quite safe ; and the eldest went up to her own bed and clapped her hands , and the bed sank into the floor and a trap-door flew open .
the soldier saw them going down through the trap-door one after another , the eldest leading the way ; and thinking he had no time to lose , he jumped up , put on the cloak which the old woman had given him , and followed them ; but in the middle of the stairs he trod on the gown of the youngest princess , and she cried out to her sisters , " all is not right ; someone took hold of my gown . "
" you silly creature ! " said the eldest , " it is nothing but a nail in the wall . "
then down they all went , and at the bottom they found themselves in a most delightful grove of trees ; and the leaves were all of silver , and glittered and sparkled beautifully .
the soldier wished to take away some token of the place ; so he broke off a little branch , and there came a loud noise from the tree .
then the youngest daughter said again , " i am sure all is not right--did not you hear that noise ?
that never happened before . "
but the eldest said , " it is only our princes , who are shouting for joy at our approach . "
then they came to another grove of trees , where all the leaves were of gold ; and afterwards to a third , where the leaves were all glittering diamonds .
and the soldier broke a branch from each ; and every time there was a loud noise , which made the youngest sister tremble with fear ; but the eldest still said , it was only the princes , who were crying for joy .
so they went on till they came to a great lake ; and at the side of the lake there lay twelve little boats with twelve handsome princes in them , who seemed to be waiting there for the princesses .
one of the princesses went into each boat , and the soldier stepped into the same boat with the youngest .
as they were rowing over the lake , the prince who was in the boat with the youngest princess and the soldier said , " i do not know why it is , but though i am rowing with all my might we do not get on so fast as usual , and i am quite tired : the boat seems very heavy today . "
" it is only the heat of the weather , " said the princess : " i feel it very warm too . "
on the other side of the lake stood a fine illuminated castle , from which came the merry music of horns and trumpets .
there they all landed , and went into the castle , and each prince danced with his princess ; and the soldier , who was all the time invisible , danced with them too ; and when any of the princesses had a cup of wine set by her , he drank it all up , so that when she put the cup to her mouth it was empty .
at this , too , the youngest sister was terribly frightened , but the eldest always silenced her .
they danced on till three o"clock in the morning , and then all their shoes were worn out , so that they were obliged to leave off .
the princes rowed them back again over the lake ( but this time the soldier placed himself in the boat with the eldest princess ) ; and on the opposite shore they took leave of each other , the princesses promising to come again the next night .
when they came to the stairs , the soldier ran on before the princesses , and laid himself down ; and as the twelve sisters slowly came up very much tired , they heard him snoring in his bed ; so they said , " now all is quite safe " ; then they undressed themselves , put away their fine clothes , pulled off their shoes , and went to bed .
in the morning the soldier said nothing about what had happened , but determined to see more of this strange adventure , and went again the second and third night ; and every thing happened just as before ; the princesses danced each time till their shoes were worn to pieces , and then returned home .
however , on the third night the soldier carried away one of the golden cups as a token of where he had been .
as soon as the time came when he was to declare the secret , he was taken before the king with the three branches and the golden cup ; and the twelve princesses stood listening behind the door to hear what he would say .
and when the king asked him " where do my twelve daughters dance at night ? " he answered , " with twelve princes in a castle under ground . "
and then he told the king all that had happened , and showed him the three branches and the golden cup which he had brought with him then the king called for the princesses , and asked them whether what the soldier said was true : and when they saw that they were discovered , and that it was of no use to deny what had happened , they confessed it all .
and the king asked the soldier which of them he would choose for his wife ; and he answered , " i am not very young , so i will have the eldest."--and they were married that very day , and the soldier was chosen to be the king"s heir .
there was once a fisherman who lived with his wife in a pigsty , close by the seaside .
the fisherman used to go out all day long a-fishing ; and one day , as he sat on the shore with his rod , looking at the sparkling waves and watching his line , all on a sudden his float was dragged away deep into the water : and in drawing it up he pulled out a great fish .
but the fish said , " pray let me live !
i am not a real fish ; i am an enchanted prince : put me in the water again , and let me go ! "
" oh , ho ! " said the man , " you need not make so many words about the matter ; i will have nothing to do with a fish that can talk : so swim away , sir , as soon as you please ! "
then he put him back into the water , and the fish darted straight down to the bottom , and left a long streak of blood behind him on the wave .
when the fisherman went home to his wife in the pigsty , he told her how he had caught a great fish , and how it had told him it was an enchanted prince , and how , on hearing it speak , he had let it go again .
" did not you ask it for anything ? " said the wife , " we live very wretchedly here , in this nasty dirty pigsty ; do go back and tell the fish we want a snug little cottage . "
the fisherman did not much like the business : however , he went to the seashore ; and when he came back there the water looked all yellow and green .
and he stood at the water"s edge , and said : " o man of the sea !
hearken to me !
my wife ilsabill will have her own will , and hath sent me to beg a boon of thee ! "
then the fish came swimming to him , and said , " well , what is her will ?
what does your wife want ? "
" ah ! " said the fisherman , " she says that when i had caught you , i ought to have asked you for something before i let you go ; she does not like living any longer in the pigsty , and wants a snug little cottage . "
" go home , then , " said the fish ; " she is in the cottage already ! "
so the man went home , and saw his wife standing at the door of a nice trim little cottage .
" come in , come in ! " said she ; " is not this much better than the filthy pigsty we had ? "
and there was a parlour , and a bedchamber , and a kitchen ; and behind the cottage there was a little garden , planted with all sorts of flowers and fruits ; and there was a courtyard behind , full of ducks and chickens .
" ah ! " said the fisherman , " how happily we shall live now ! "
" we will try to do so , at least , " said his wife .
everything went right for a week or two , and then dame ilsabill said , " husband , there is not near room enough for us in this cottage ; the courtyard and the garden are a great deal too small ; i should like to have a large stone castle to live in : go to the fish again and tell him to give us a castle . "
" wife , " said the fisherman , " i don"t like to go to him again , for perhaps he will be angry ; we ought to be easy with this pretty cottage to live in . "
" nonsense ! " said the wife ; " he will do it very willingly , i know ; go along and try ! "
the fisherman went , but his heart was very heavy : and when he came to the sea , it looked blue and gloomy , though it was very calm ; and he went close to the edge of the waves , and said : " o man of the sea !
hearken to me !
my wife ilsabill will have her own will , and hath sent me to beg a boon of thee ! "
" well , what does she want now ? " said the fish .
" ah ! " said the man , dolefully , " my wife wants to live in a stone castle . "
" go home , then , " said the fish ; " she is standing at the gate of it already . "
so away went the fisherman , and found his wife standing before the gate of a great castle .
" see , " said she , " is not this grand ? "
with that they went into the castle together , and found a great many servants there , and the rooms all richly furnished , and full of golden chairs and tables ; and behind the castle was a garden , and around it was a park half a mile long , full of sheep , and goats , and hares , and deer ; and in the courtyard were stables and cow-houses .
" well , " said the man , " now we will live cheerful and happy in this beautiful castle for the rest of our lives . "
" perhaps we may , " said the wife ; " but let us sleep upon it , before we make up our minds to that . "
so they went to bed .
the next morning when dame ilsabill awoke it was broad daylight , and she jogged the fisherman with her elbow , and said , " get up , husband , and bestir yourself , for we must be king of all the land . "
" wife , wife , " said the man , " why should we wish to be the king ?
i will not be king . "
" then i will , " said she .
" but , wife , " said the fisherman , " how can you be king--the fish cannot make you a king ? "
" husband , " said she , " say no more about it , but go and try !
i will be king . "
so the man went away quite sorrowful to think that his wife should want to be king .
this time the sea looked a dark grey colour , and was overspread with curling waves and the ridges of foam as he cried out : " o man of the sea !
hearken to me !
my wife ilsabill will have her own will , and hath sent me to beg a boon of thee ! "
" well , what would she have now ? " said the fish .
" alas ! " said the poor man , " my wife wants to be king . "
" go home , " said the fish ; " she is king already . "
then the fisherman went home ; and as he came close to the palace he saw a troop of soldiers , and heard the sound of drums and trumpets .
and when he went in he saw his wife sitting on a throne of gold and diamonds , with a golden crown upon her head ; and on each side of her stood six fair maidens , each a head taller than the other .
" well , wife , " said the fisherman , " are you king ? "
" yes , " said she , " i am king . "
and when he had looked at her for a long time , he said , " ah , wife ! what a fine thing it is to be king !
now we shall never have anything more to wish for as long as we live . "
" i don"t know how that may be , " said she ; " never is a long time .
i am king , it is true ; but i begin to be tired of that , and i think i should like to be emperor . "
" alas , wife ! why should you wish to be emperor ? " said the fisherman .
" husband , " said she , " go to the fish !
i say i will be emperor . "
" ah , wife ! " replied the fisherman , " the fish cannot make an emperor , i am sure , and i should not like to ask him for such a thing . "
" i am king , " said ilsabill , " and you are my slave ; so go at once ! "
so the fisherman was forced to go ; and he muttered as he went along , " this will come to no good , it is too much to ask ; the fish will be tired at last , and then we shall be sorry for what we have done . "
he soon came to the seashore ; and the water was quite black and muddy , and a mighty whirlwind blew over the waves and rolled them about , but he went as near as he could to the water"s brink , and said : " o man of the sea !
hearken to me !
my wife ilsabill will have her own will , and hath sent me to beg a boon of thee ! "
" what would she have now ? " said the fish .
" ah ! " said the fisherman , " she wants to be emperor . "
" go home , " said the fish ; " she is emperor already . "
so he went home again ; and as he came near he saw his wife ilsabill sitting on a very lofty throne made of solid gold , with a great crown on her head full two yards high ; and on each side of her stood her guards and attendants in a row , each one smaller than the other , from the tallest giant down to a little dwarf no bigger than my finger .
and before her stood princes , and dukes , and earls : and the fisherman went up to her and said , " wife , are you emperor ? "
" yes , " said she , " i am emperor . "
" ah ! " said the man , as he gazed upon her , " what a fine thing it is to be emperor ! "
" husband , " said she , " why should we stop at being emperor ?
i will be pope next . "
" o wife , wife ! " said he , " how can you be pope ? there is but one pope at a time in christendom " " husband , " said she , " i will be pope this very day . "
" but , " replied the husband , " the fish cannot make you pope . "
" what nonsense ! " said she ; " if he can make an emperor , he can make a pope : go and try him " so the fisherman went .
but when he came to the shore the wind was raging and the sea was tossed up and down in boiling waves , and the ships were in trouble , and rolled fearfully upon the tops of the billows .
in the middle of the heavens there was a little piece of blue sky , but towards the south all was red , as if a dreadful storm was rising .
at this sight the fisherman was dreadfully frightened , and he trembled so that his knees knocked together : but still he went down near to the shore , and said : " o man of the sea !
hearken to me !
my wife ilsabill will have her own will , and hath sent me to beg a boon of thee ! "
" what does she want now ? " said the fish .
" ah ! " said the fisherman , " my wife wants to be pope . "
" go home , " said the fish ; " she is pope already . "
then the fisherman went home , and found ilsabill sitting on a throne that was two miles high .
and she had three great crowns on her head , and around her stood all the pomp and power of the church .
and on each side of her were two rows of burning lights , of all sizes , the greatest as large as the highest and biggest tower in the world , and the least no larger than a small rushlight .
" wife , " said the fisherman , as he looked at all this greatness , " are you pope ? "
" yes , " said she , " i am pope . "
" well , wife , " replied he , " it is a grand thing to be pope ; and now you must be easy , for you can be nothing greater . "
" i will think about that , " said the wife .
then they went to bed : but dame ilsabill could not sleep all night for thinking what she should be next .
at last , as she was dropping asleep , morning broke , and the sun rose .
" ha ! " thought she , as she woke up and looked at it through the window , " after all i cannot prevent the sun rising . "
at this thought she was very angry , and wakened her husband , and said , " husband , go to the fish and tell him i must be lord of the sun and moon . "
the fisherman was half asleep , but the thought frightened him so much that he started and fell out of bed .
" alas , wife ! " said he , " cannot you be easy with being pope ? "
" no , " said she , " i am very uneasy as long as the sun and moon rise without my leave .
go to the fish at once ! "
then the man went shivering with fear ; and as he was going down to the shore a dreadful storm arose , so that the trees and the very rocks shook .
and all the heavens became black with stormy clouds , and the lightnings played , and the thunders rolled ; and you might have seen in the sea great black waves , swelling up like mountains with crowns of white foam upon their heads .
and the fisherman crept towards the sea , and cried out , as well as he could : " o man of the sea !
hearken to me !
my wife ilsabill will have her own will , and hath sent me to beg a boon of thee ! "
" what does she want now ? " said the fish .
" ah ! " said he , " she wants to be lord of the sun and moon . "
" go home , " said the fish , " to your pigsty again . "
and there they live to this very day .
once in summer-time the bear and the wolf were walking in the forest , and the bear heard a bird singing so beautifully that he said : " brother wolf , what bird is it that sings so well ? "
" that is the king of birds , " said the wolf , " before whom we must bow down . "
in reality the bird was the willow-wren .
" if that"s the case , " said the bear , " i should very much like to see his royal palace ; come , take me thither . "
" that is not done quite as you seem to think , " said the wolf ; " you must wait until the queen comes , " soon afterwards , the queen arrived with some food in her beak , and the lord king came too , and they began to feed their young ones .
the bear would have liked to go at once , but the wolf held him back by the sleeve , and said : " no , you must wait until the lord and lady queen have gone away again . "
so they took stock of the hole where the nest lay , and trotted away .
the bear , however , could not rest until he had seen the royal palace , and when a short time had passed , went to it again .
the king and queen had just flown out , so he peeped in and saw five or six young ones lying there .
" is that the royal palace ? " cried the bear ; " it is a wretched palace , and you are not king"s children , you are disreputable children ! "
when the young wrens heard that , they were frightfully angry , and screamed : " no , that we are not !
our parents are honest people !
bear , you will have to pay for that ! "
the bear and the wolf grew uneasy , and turned back and went into their holes .
the young willow-wrens , however , continued to cry and scream , and when their parents again brought food they said : " we will not so much as touch one fly"s leg , no , not if we were dying of hunger , until you have settled whether we are respectable children or not ; the bear has been here and has insulted us ! "
then the old king said : " be easy , he shall be punished , " and he at once flew with the queen to the bear"s cave , and called in : " old growler , why have you insulted my children ?
you shall suffer for it--we will punish you by a bloody war . "
thus war was announced to the bear , and all four-footed animals were summoned to take part in it , oxen , asses , cows , deer , and every other animal the earth contained .
and the willow-wren summoned everything which flew in the air , not only birds , large and small , but midges , and hornets , bees and flies had to come .
when the time came for the war to begin , the willow-wren sent out spies to discover who was the enemy"s commander-in-chief .
the gnat , who was the most crafty , flew into the forest where the enemy was assembled , and hid herself beneath a leaf of the tree where the password was to be announced .
there stood the bear , and he called the fox before him and said : " fox , you are the most cunning of all animals , you shall be general and lead us . "
" good , " said the fox , " but what signal shall we agree upon ? "
no one knew that , so the fox said : " i have a fine long bushy tail , which almost looks like a plume of red feathers .
when i lift my tail up quite high , all is going well , and you must charge ; but if i let it hang down , run away as fast as you can . "
when the gnat had heard that , she flew away again , and revealed everything , down to the minutest detail , to the willow-wren .
when day broke , and the battle was to begin , all the four-footed animals came running up with such a noise that the earth trembled .
the willow-wren with his army also came flying through the air with such a humming , and whirring , and swarming that every one was uneasy and afraid , and on both sides they advanced against each other .
but the willow-wren sent down the hornet , with orders to settle beneath the fox"s tail , and sting with all his might .
when the fox felt the first string , he started so that he lifted one leg , from pain , but he bore it , and still kept his tail high in the air ; at the second sting , he was forced to put it down for a moment ; at the third , he could hold out no longer , screamed , and put his tail between his legs .
when the animals saw that , they thought all was lost , and began to flee , each into his hole , and the birds had won the battle .
then the king and queen flew home to their children and cried : " children , rejoice , eat and drink to your heart"s content , we have won the battle ! "
but the young wrens said : " we will not eat yet , the bear must come to the nest , and beg for pardon and say that we are honourable children , before we will do that . "
then the willow-wren flew to the bear"s hole and cried : " growler , you are to come to the nest to my children , and beg their pardon , or else every rib of your body shall be broken . "
so the bear crept thither in the greatest fear , and begged their pardon .
and now at last the young wrens were satisfied , and sat down together and ate and drank , and made merry till quite late into the night .
one fine evening a young princess put on her bonnet and clogs , and went out to take a walk by herself in a wood ; and when she came to a cool spring of water , that rose in the midst of it , she sat herself down to rest a while .
now she had a golden ball in her hand , which was her favourite plaything ; and she was always tossing it up into the air , and catching it again as it fell .
after a time she threw it up so high that she missed catching it as it fell ; and the ball bounded away , and rolled along upon the ground , till at last it fell down into the spring .
the princess looked into the spring after her ball , but it was very deep , so deep that she could not see the bottom of it .
then she began to bewail her loss , and said , " alas ! if i could only get my ball again , i would give all my fine clothes and jewels , and everything that i have in the world . "
whilst she was speaking , a frog put its head out of the water , and said , " princess , why do you weep so bitterly ? "
" alas ! " said she , " what can you do for me , you nasty frog ?
my golden ball has fallen into the spring . "
the frog said , " i want not your pearls , and jewels , and fine clothes ; but if you will love me , and let me live with you and eat from off your golden plate , and sleep upon your bed , i will bring you your ball again . "
" what nonsense , " thought the princess , " this silly frog is talking !
he can never even get out of the spring to visit me , though he may be able to get my ball for me , and therefore i will tell him he shall have what he asks . "
so she said to the frog , " well , if you will bring me my ball , i will do all you ask . "
then the frog put his head down , and dived deep under the water ; and after a little while he came up again , with the ball in his mouth , and threw it on the edge of the spring .
as soon as the young princess saw her ball , she ran to pick it up ; and she was so overjoyed to have it in her hand again , that she never thought of the frog , but ran home with it as fast as she could .
the frog called after her , " stay , princess , and take me with you as you said , " but she did not stop to hear a word .
the next day , just as the princess had sat down to dinner , she heard a strange noise--tap , tap--plash , plash--as if something was coming up the marble staircase : and soon afterwards there was a gentle knock at the door , and a little voice cried out and said : " open the door , my princess dear , open the door to thy true love here !
and mind the words that thou and i said by the fountain cool , in the greenwood shade . "
then the princess ran to the door and opened it , and there she saw the frog , whom she had quite forgotten .
at this sight she was sadly frightened , and shutting the door as fast as she could came back to her seat .
the king , her father , seeing that something had frightened her , asked her what was the matter .
" there is a nasty frog , " said she , " at the door , that lifted my ball for me out of the spring this morning : i told him that he should live with me here , thinking that he could never get out of the spring ; but there he is at the door , and he wants to come in . "
while she was speaking the frog knocked again at the door , and said : " open the door , my princess dear , open the door to thy true love here !
and mind the words that thou and i said by the fountain cool , in the greenwood shade . "
then the king said to the young princess , " as you have given your word you must keep it ; so go and let him in . "
she did so , and the frog hopped into the room , and then straight on--tap , tap--plash , plash--from the bottom of the room to the top , till he came up close to the table where the princess sat .
" pray lift me upon chair , " said he to the princess , " and let me sit next to you . "
as soon as she had done this , the frog said , " put your plate nearer to me , that i may eat out of it . "
this she did , and when he had eaten as much as he could , he said , " now i am tired ; carry me upstairs , and put me into your bed . "
and the princess , though very unwilling , took him up in her hand , and put him upon the pillow of her own bed , where he slept all night long .
as soon as it was light he jumped up , hopped downstairs , and went out of the house .
" now , then , " thought the princess , " at last he is gone , and i shall be troubled with him no more . "
but she was mistaken ; for when night came again she heard the same tapping at the door ; and the frog came once more , and said : " open the door , my princess dear , open the door to thy true love here !
and mind the words that thou and i said by the fountain cool , in the greenwood shade . "
and when the princess opened the door the frog came in , and slept upon her pillow as before , till the morning broke .
and the third night he did the same .
but when the princess awoke on the following morning she was astonished to see , instead of the frog , a handsome prince , gazing on her with the most beautiful eyes she had ever seen , and standing at the head of her bed .
he told her that he had been enchanted by a spiteful fairy , who had changed him into a frog ; and that he had been fated so to abide till some princess should take him out of the spring , and let him eat from her plate , and sleep upon her bed for three nights .
" you , " said the prince , " have broken his cruel charm , and now i have nothing to wish for but that you should go with me into my father"s kingdom , where i will marry you , and love you as long as you live . "
the young princess , you may be sure , was not long in saying " yes " to all this ; and as they spoke a gay coach drove up , with eight beautiful horses , decked with plumes of feathers and a golden harness ; and behind the coach rode the prince"s servant , faithful heinrich , who had bewailed the misfortunes of his dear master during his enchantment so long and so bitterly , that his heart had well-nigh burst .
they then took leave of the king , and got into the coach with eight horses , and all set out , full of joy and merriment , for the prince"s kingdom , which they reached safely ; and there they lived happily a great many years .
a certain cat had made the acquaintance of a mouse , and had said so much to her about the great love and friendship she felt for her , that at length the mouse agreed that they should live and keep house together .
" but we must make a provision for winter , or else we shall suffer from hunger , " said the cat ; " and you , little mouse , cannot venture everywhere , or you will be caught in a trap some day . "
the good advice was followed , and a pot of fat was bought , but they did not know where to put it .
at length , after much consideration , the cat said : " i know no place where it will be better stored up than in the church , for no one dares take anything away from there .
we will set it beneath the altar , and not touch it until we are really in need of it . "
so the pot was placed in safety , but it was not long before the cat had a great yearning for it , and said to the mouse : " i want to tell you something , little mouse ; my cousin has brought a little son into the world , and has asked me to be godmother ; he is white with brown spots , and i am to hold him over the font at the christening .
let me go out today , and you look after the house by yourself . "
" yes , yes , " answered the mouse , " by all means go , and if you get anything very good to eat , think of me .
i should like a drop of sweet red christening wine myself . "
all this , however , was untrue ; the cat had no cousin , and had not been asked to be godmother .
she went straight to the church , stole to the pot of fat , began to lick at it , and licked the top of the fat off .
then she took a walk upon the roofs of the town , looked out for opportunities , and then stretched herself in the sun , and licked her lips whenever she thought of the pot of fat , and not until it was evening did she return home .
" well , here you are again , " said the mouse , " no doubt you have had a merry day . "
" all went off well , " answered the cat .
" what name did they give the child ? "
" top off ! " said the cat quite coolly .
" top off ! " cried the mouse , " that is a very odd and uncommon name , is it a usual one in your family ? "
" what does that matter , " said the cat , " it is no worse than crumb-stealer , as your godchildren are called . "
before long the cat was seized by another fit of yearning .
she said to the mouse : " you must do me a favour , and once more manage the house for a day alone .
i am again asked to be godmother , and , as the child has a white ring round its neck , i cannot refuse . "
the good mouse consented , but the cat crept behind the town walls to the church , and devoured half the pot of fat .
" nothing ever seems so good as what one keeps to oneself , " said she , and was quite satisfied with her day"s work .
when she went home the mouse inquired : " and what was the child christened ? "
" half-done , " answered the cat .
" half-done !
what are you saying ?
i never heard the name in my life , i"ll wager anything it is not in the calendar ! "
the cat"s mouth soon began to water for some more licking .
" all good things go in threes , " said she , " i am asked to stand godmother again .
the child is quite black , only it has white paws , but with that exception , it has not a single white hair on its whole body ; this only happens once every few years , you will let me go , won"t you ? "
" top-off !
half-done ! " answered the mouse , " they are such odd names , they make me very thoughtful . "
" you sit at home , " said the cat , " in your dark-grey fur coat and long tail , and are filled with fancies , that"s because you do not go out in the daytime . "
during the cat"s absence the mouse cleaned the house , and put it in order , but the greedy cat entirely emptied the pot of fat .
" when everything is eaten up one has some peace , " said she to herself , and well filled and fat she did not return home till night .
the mouse at once asked what name had been given to the third child .
" it will not please you more than the others , " said the cat .
" he is called all-gone . "
" all-gone , " cried the mouse " that is the most suspicious name of all !
i have never seen it in print .
all-gone ; what can that mean ? " and she shook her head , curled herself up , and lay down to sleep .
from this time forth no one invited the cat to be godmother , but when the winter had come and there was no longer anything to be found outside , the mouse thought of their provision , and said : " come , cat , we will go to our pot of fat which we have stored up for ourselves--we shall enjoy that . "
" yes , " answered the cat , " you will enjoy it as much as you would enjoy sticking that dainty tongue of yours out of the window . "
they set out on their way , but when they arrived , the pot of fat certainly was still in its place , but it was empty .
" alas ! " said the mouse , " now i see what has happened , now it comes to light !
you are a true friend !
you have devoured all when you were standing godmother .
first top off , then half-done , then - - " " will you hold your tongue , " cried the cat , " one word more , and i will eat you too . "
" all-gone " was already on the poor mouse"s lips ; scarcely had she spoken it before the cat sprang on her , seized her , and swallowed her down .
verily , that is the way of the world .
the king of a great land died , and left his queen to take care of their only child .
this child was a daughter , who was very beautiful ; and her mother loved her dearly , and was very kind to her .
and there was a good fairy too , who was fond of the princess , and helped her mother to watch over her .
when she grew up , she was betrothed to a prince who lived a great way off ; and as the time drew near for her to be married , she got ready to set off on her journey to his country .
then the queen her mother , packed up a great many costly things ; jewels , and gold , and silver ; trinkets , fine dresses , and in short everything that became a royal bride .
and she gave her a waiting-maid to ride with her , and give her into the bridegroom"s hands ; and each had a horse for the journey .
now the princess"s horse was the fairy"s gift , and it was called falada , and could speak .
when the time came for them to set out , the fairy went into her bed-chamber , and took a little knife , and cut off a lock of her hair , and gave it to the princess , and said , " take care of it , dear child ; for it is a charm that may be of use to you on the road . "
then they all took a sorrowful leave of the princess ; and she put the lock of hair into her bosom , got upon her horse , and set off on her journey to her bridegroom"s kingdom one day , as they were riding along by a brook , the princess began to feel very thirsty : and she said to her maid , " pray get down , and fetch me some water in my golden cup out of yonder brook , for i want to drink . "
" nay , " said the maid , " if you are thirsty , get off yourself , and stoop down by the water and drink ; i shall not be your waiting-maid any longer . "
then she was so thirsty that she got down , and knelt over the little brook , and drank ; for she was frightened , and dared not bring out her golden cup ; and she wept and said , " alas ! what will become of me ? "
and the lock answered her , and said : " alas ! alas ! if thy mother knew it , sadly , sadly , would she rue it . "
but the princess was very gentle and meek , so she said nothing to her maid"s ill behaviour , but got upon her horse again .
then all rode farther on their journey , till the day grew so warm , and the sun so scorching , that the bride began to feel very thirsty again ; and at last , when they came to a river , she forgot her maid"s rude speech , and said , " pray get down , and fetch me some water to drink in my golden cup . "
but the maid answered her , and even spoke more haughtily than before : " drink if you will , but i shall not be your waiting-maid . "
then the princess was so thirsty that she got off her horse , and lay down , and held her head over the running stream , and cried and said , " what will become of me ? "
and the lock of hair answered her again : " alas ! alas ! if thy mother knew it , sadly , sadly , would she rue it . "
and as she leaned down to drink , the lock of hair fell from her bosom , and floated away with the water .
now she was so frightened that she did not see it ; but her maid saw it , and was very glad , for she knew the charm ; and she saw that the poor bride would be in her power , now that she had lost the hair .
so when the bride had done drinking , and would have got upon falada again , the maid said , " i shall ride upon falada , and you may have my horse instead " ; so she was forced to give up her horse , and soon afterwards to take off her royal clothes and put on her maid"s shabby ones .
at last , as they drew near the end of their journey , this treacherous servant threatened to kill her mistress if she ever told anyone what had happened .
but falada saw it all , and marked it well .
then the waiting-maid got upon falada , and the real bride rode upon the other horse , and they went on in this way till at last they came to the royal court .
there was great joy at their coming , and the prince flew to meet them , and lifted the maid from her horse , thinking she was the one who was to be his wife ; and she was led upstairs to the royal chamber ; but the true princess was told to stay in the court below .
now the old king happened just then to have nothing else to do ; so he amused himself by sitting at his kitchen window , looking at what was going on ; and he saw her in the courtyard .
as she looked very pretty , and too delicate for a waiting-maid , he went up into the royal chamber to ask the bride who it was she had brought with her , that was thus left standing in the court below .
" i brought her with me for the sake of her company on the road , " said she ; " pray give the girl some work to do , that she may not be idle . "
the old king could not for some time think of any work for her to do ; but at last he said , " i have a lad who takes care of my geese ; she may go and help him " now the name of this lad , that the real bride was to help in watching the king"s geese , was curdken .
but the false bride said to the prince , " dear husband , pray do me one piece of kindness . "
" that i will , " said the prince .
" then tell one of your slaughterers to cut off the head of the horse i rode upon , for it was very unruly , and plagued me sadly on the road " ; but the truth was , she was very much afraid lest falada should some day or other speak , and tell all she had done to the princess .
she carried her point , and the faithful falada was killed ; but when the true princess heard of it , she wept , and begged the man to nail up falada"s head against a large dark gate of the city , through which she had to pass every morning and evening , that there she might still see him sometimes .
then the slaughterer said he would do as she wished ; and cut off the head , and nailed it up under the dark gate .
early the next morning , as she and curdken went out through the gate , she said sorrowfully : " falada , falada , there thou hangest ! " and the head answered : " bride , bride , there thou gangest !
alas ! alas ! if thy mother knew it , sadly , sadly , would she rue it . "
then they went out of the city , and drove the geese on .
and when she came to the meadow , she sat down upon a bank there , and let down her waving locks of hair , which were all of pure silver ; and when curdken saw it glitter in the sun , he ran up , and would have pulled some of the locks out , but she cried : " blow , breezes , blow !
let curdken"s hat go !
blow , breezes , blow !
let him after it go !
o"er hills , dales , and rocks , away be it whirl"d till the silvery locks are all comb"d and curl"d !
then there came a wind , so strong that it blew off curdken"s hat ; and away it flew over the hills : and he was forced to turn and run after it ; till , by the time he came back , she had done combing and curling her hair , and had put it up again safe .
then he was very angry and sulky , and would not speak to her at all ; but they watched the geese until it grew dark in the evening , and then drove them homewards .
the next morning , as they were going through the dark gate , the poor girl looked up at falada"s head , and cried : " falada , falada , there thou hangest ! " and the head answered : " bride , bride , there thou gangest !
alas ! alas ! if thy mother knew it , sadly , sadly , would she rue it . "
then she drove on the geese , and sat down again in the meadow , and began to comb out her hair as before ; and curdken ran up to her , and wanted to take hold of it ; but she cried out quickly : " blow , breezes , blow !
let curdken"s hat go !
blow , breezes , blow !
let him after it go !
o"er hills , dales , and rocks , away be it whirl"d till the silvery locks are all comb"d and curl"d !
then the wind came and blew away his hat ; and off it flew a great way , over the hills and far away , so that he had to run after it ; and when he came back she had bound up her hair again , and all was safe .
so they watched the geese till it grew dark .
in the evening , after they came home , curdken went to the old king , and said , " i cannot have that strange girl to help me to keep the geese any longer . "
" why ? " said the king .
" because , instead of doing any good , she does nothing but tease me all day long . "
then the king made him tell him what had happened .
and curdken said , " when we go in the morning through the dark gate with our flock of geese , she cries and talks with the head of a horse that hangs upon the wall , and says : " falada , falada , there thou hangest ! " and the head answers : " bride , bride , there thou gangest !
alas ! alas ! if thy mother knew it , sadly , sadly , would she rue it . "
and curdken went on telling the king what had happened upon the meadow where the geese fed ; how his hat was blown away ; and how he was forced to run after it , and to leave his flock of geese to themselves .
but the old king told the boy to go out again the next day : and when morning came , he placed himself behind the dark gate , and heard how she spoke to falada , and how falada answered .
then he went into the field , and hid himself in a bush by the meadow"s side ; and he soon saw with his own eyes how they drove the flock of geese ; and how , after a little time , she let down her hair that glittered in the sun .
and then he heard her say : " blow , breezes , blow !
let curdken"s hat go !
blow , breezes , blow !
let him after it go !
o"er hills , dales , and rocks , away be it whirl"d till the silvery locks are all comb"d and curl"d !
and soon came a gale of wind , and carried away curdken"s hat , and away went curdken after it , while the girl went on combing and curling her hair .
all this the old king saw : so he went home without being seen ; and when the little goose-girl came back in the evening he called her aside , and asked her why she did so : but she burst into tears , and said , " that i must not tell you or any man , or i shall lose my life . "
but the old king begged so hard , that she had no peace till she had told him all the tale , from beginning to end , word for word .
and it was very lucky for her that she did so , for when she had done the king ordered royal clothes to be put upon her , and gazed on her with wonder , she was so beautiful .
then he called his son and told him that he had only a false bride ; for that she was merely a waiting-maid , while the true bride stood by .
and the young king rejoiced when he saw her beauty , and heard how meek and patient she had been ; and without saying anything to the false bride , the king ordered a great feast to be got ready for all his court .
the bridegroom sat at the top , with the false princess on one side , and the true one on the other ; but nobody knew her again , for her beauty was quite dazzling to their eyes ; and she did not seem at all like the little goose-girl , now that she had her brilliant dress on .
when they had eaten and drank , and were very merry , the old king said he would tell them a tale .
so he began , and told all the story of the princess , as if it was one that he had once heard ; and he asked the true waiting-maid what she thought ought to be done to anyone who would behave thus .
" nothing better , " said this false bride , " than that she should be thrown into a cask stuck round with sharp nails , and that two white horses should be put to it , and should drag it from street to street till she was dead . "
" thou art she ! " said the old king ; " and as thou has judged thyself , so shall it be done to thee . "
and the young king was then married to his true wife , and they reigned over the kingdom in peace and happiness all their lives ; and the good fairy came to see them , and restored the faithful falada to life again .
" the nuts are quite ripe now , " said chanticleer to his wife partlet , " suppose we go together to the mountains , and eat as many as we can , before the squirrel takes them all away . "
" with all my heart , " said partlet , " let us go and make a holiday of it together . "
so they went to the mountains ; and as it was a lovely day , they stayed there till the evening .
now , whether it was that they had eaten so many nuts that they could not walk , or whether they were lazy and would not , i do not know : however , they took it into their heads that it did not become them to go home on foot .
so chanticleer began to build a little carriage of nutshells : and when it was finished , partlet jumped into it and sat down , and bid chanticleer harness himself to it and draw her home .
" that"s a good joke ! " said chanticleer ; " no , that will never do ; i had rather by half walk home ; i"ll sit on the box and be coachman , if you like , but i"ll not draw . "
while this was passing , a duck came quacking up and cried out , " you thieving vagabonds , what business have you in my grounds ?
i"ll give it you well for your insolence ! " and upon that she fell upon chanticleer most lustily .
but chanticleer was no coward , and returned the duck"s blows with his sharp spurs so fiercely that she soon began to cry out for mercy ; which was only granted her upon condition that she would draw the carriage home for them this she agreed to do ; and chanticleer got upon the box , and drove , crying , " now , duck , get on as fast as you can . "
and away they went at a pretty good pace .
after they had travelled along a little way , they met a needle and a pin walking together along the road : and the needle cried out , " stop , stop ! " and said it was so dark that they could hardly find their way , and such dirty walking they could not get on at all : he told them that he and his friend , the pin , had been at a public-house a few miles off , and had sat drinking till they had forgotten how late it was ; he begged therefore that the travellers would be so kind as to give them a lift in their carriage .
chanticleer observing that they were but thin fellows , and not likely to take up much room , told them they might ride , but made them promise not to dirty the wheels of the carriage in getting in , nor to tread on partlet"s toes .
late at night they arrived at an inn ; and as it was bad travelling in the dark , and the duck seemed much tired , and waddled about a good deal from one side to the other , they made up their minds to fix their quarters there : but the landlord at first was unwilling , and said his house was full , thinking they might not be very respectable company : however , they spoke civilly to him , and gave him the egg which partlet had laid by the way , and said they would give him the duck , who was in the habit of laying one every day : so at last he let them come in , and they bespoke a handsome supper , and spent the evening very jollily .
early in the morning , before it was quite light , and when nobody was stirring in the inn , chanticleer awakened his wife , and , fetching the egg , they pecked a hole in it , ate it up , and threw the shells into the fireplace : they then went to the pin and needle , who were fast asleep , and seizing them by the heads , stuck one into the landlord"s easy chair and the other into his handkerchief ; and , having done this , they crept away as softly as possible .
however , the duck , who slept in the open air in the yard , heard them coming , and jumping into the brook which ran close by the inn , soon swam out of their reach .
an hour or two afterwards the landlord got up , and took his handkerchief to wipe his face , but the pin ran into him and pricked him : then he walked into the kitchen to light his pipe at the fire , but when he stirred it up the eggshells flew into his eyes , and almost blinded him " bless me ! " said he , " all the world seems to have a design against my head this morning " : and so saying , he threw himself sulkily into his easy chair ; but , oh dear ! the needle ran into him ; and this time the pain was not in his head .
he now flew into a very great passion , and , suspecting the company who had come in the night before , he went to look after them , but they were all off ; so he swore that he never again would take in such a troop of vagabonds , who ate a great deal , paid no reckoning , and gave him nothing for his trouble but their apish tricks .
another day , chanticleer and partlet wished to ride out together ; so chanticleer built a handsome carriage with four red wheels , and harnessed six mice to it ; and then he and partlet got into the carriage , and away they drove .
soon afterwards a cat met them , and said , " where are you going ? "
and chanticleer replied , " all on our way a visit to pay to mr korbes , the fox , today . "
then the cat said , " take me with you , " chanticleer said , " with all my heart : get up behind , and be sure you do not fall off . "
" take care of this handsome coach of mine , nor dirty my pretty red wheels so fine !
now , mice , be ready , and , wheels , run steady !
for we are going a visit to pay to mr korbes , the fox , today . "
soon after came up a millstone , an egg , a duck , and a pin ; and chanticleer gave them all leave to get into the carriage and go with them when they arrived at mr korbes"s house , he was not at home ; so the mice drew the carriage into the coach-house , chanticleer and partlet flew upon a beam , the cat sat down in the fireplace , the duck got into the washing cistern , the pin stuck himself into the bed pillow , the millstone laid himself over the house door , and the egg rolled himself up in the towel .
when mr korbes came home , he went to the fireplace to make a fire ; but the cat threw all the ashes in his eyes : so he ran to the kitchen to wash himself ; but there the duck splashed all the water in his face ; and when he tried to wipe himself , the egg broke to pieces in the towel all over his face and eyes .
then he was very angry , and went without his supper to bed ; but when he laid his head on the pillow , the pin ran into his cheek : at this he became quite furious , and , jumping up , would have run out of the house ; but when he came to the door , the millstone fell down on his head , and killed him on the spot .
another day chanticleer and partlet agreed to go again to the mountains to eat nuts ; and it was settled that all the nuts which they found should be shared equally between them now partlet found a very large nut ; but she said nothing about it to chanticleer , and kept it all to herself : however , it was so big that she could not swallow it , and it stuck in her throat .
then she was in a great fright , and cried out to chanticleer , " pray run as fast as you can , and fetch me some water , or i shall be choked . "
chanticleer ran as fast as he could to the river , and said , " river , give me some water , for partlet lies in the mountain , and will be choked by a great nut . "
the river said , " run first to the bride , and ask her for a silken cord to draw up the water . "
chanticleer ran to the bride , and said , " bride , you must give me a silken cord , for then the river will give me water , and the water i will carry to partlet , who lies on the mountain , and will be choked by a great nut . "
but the bride said , " run first , and bring me my garland that is hanging on a willow in the garden . "
then chanticleer ran to the garden , and took the garland from the bough where it hung , and brought it to the bride ; and then the bride gave him the silken cord , and he took the silken cord to the river , and the river gave him water , and he carried the water to partlet ; but in the meantime she was choked by the great nut , and lay quite dead , and never moved any more .
then chanticleer was very sorry , and cried bitterly ; and all the beasts came and wept with him over poor partlet .
and six mice built a little hearse to carry her to her grave ; and when it was ready they harnessed themselves before it , and chanticleer drove them on the way they met the fox .
" where are you going , chanticleer ? " said he .
" to bury my partlet , " said the other .
" may i go with you ? " said the fox .
" yes ; but you must get up behind , or my horses will not be able to draw you . "
then the fox got up behind ; and presently the wolf , the bear , the goat , and all the beasts of the wood , came and climbed upon the hearse .
so on they went till they came to a rapid stream " how shall we get over ? " said chanticleer .
then said a straw , " i will lay myself across , and you may pass over upon me . "
but as the mice were going over , the straw slipped away and fell into the water , and the six mice all fell in and were drowned .
what was to be done ?
then a large log of wood came and said , " i am big enough ; i will lay myself across the stream , and you shall pass over upon me . "
so he laid himself down ; but they managed so clumsily , that the log of wood fell in and was carried away by the stream then a stone , who saw what had happened , came up and kindly offered to help poor chanticleer by laying himself across the stream ; and this time he got safely to the other side with the hearse , and managed to get partlet out of it ; but the fox and the other mourners , who were sitting behind , were too heavy , and fell back into the water and were all carried away by the stream and drowned .
thus chanticleer was left alone with his dead partlet ; and having dug a grave for her , he laid her in it , and made a little hillock over her .
then he sat down by the grave , and wept and mourned , till at last he died too ; and so all were dead .
there were once a man and a woman who had long in vain wished for a child .
at length the woman hoped that god was about to grant her desire .
these people had a little window at the back of their house from which a splendid garden could be seen , which was full of the most beautiful flowers and herbs .
it was , however , surrounded by a high wall , and no one dared to go into it because it belonged to an enchantress , who had great power and was dreaded by all the world .
one day the woman was standing by this window and looking down into the garden , when she saw a bed which was planted with the most beautiful rampion ( rapunzel ) , and it looked so fresh and green that she longed for it , she quite pined away , and began to look pale and miserable .
then her husband was alarmed , and asked : " what ails you , dear wife ? "
" ah , " she replied , " if i can"t eat some of the rampion , which is in the garden behind our house , i shall die . "
the man , who loved her , thought : " sooner than let your wife die , bring her some of the rampion yourself , let it cost what it will . "
at twilight , he clambered down over the wall into the garden of the enchantress , hastily clutched a handful of rampion , and took it to his wife .
she at once made herself a salad of it , and ate it greedily .
it tasted so good to her--so very good , that the next day she longed for it three times as much as before .
if he was to have any rest , her husband must once more descend into the garden .
in the gloom of evening therefore , he let himself down again ; but when he had clambered down the wall he was terribly afraid , for he saw the enchantress standing before him " how can you dare , " said she with angry look , " descend into my garden and steal my rampion like a thief ?
you shall suffer for it ! "
" ah , " answered he , " let mercy take the place of justice , i only made up my mind to do it out of necessity .
my wife saw your rampion from the window , and felt such a longing for it that she would have died if she had not got some to eat . "
then the enchantress allowed her anger to be softened , and said to him : " if the case be as you say , i will allow you to take away with you as much rampion as you will , only i make one condition , you must give me the child which your wife will bring into the world ; it shall be well treated , and i will care for it like a mother . "
the man in his terror consented to everything , and when the woman was brought to bed , the enchantress appeared at once , gave the child the name of rapunzel , and took it away with her .
rapunzel grew into the most beautiful child under the sun .
when she was twelve years old , the enchantress shut her into a tower , which lay in a forest , and had neither stairs nor door , but quite at the top was a little window .
when the enchantress wanted to go in , she placed herself beneath it and cried : " rapunzel , rapunzel , let down your hair to me . "
rapunzel had magnificent long hair , fine as spun gold , and when she heard the voice of the enchantress she unfastened her braided tresses , wound them round one of the hooks of the window above , and then the hair fell twenty ells down , and the enchantress climbed up by it .
after a year or two , it came to pass that the king"s son rode through the forest and passed by the tower .
then he heard a song , which was so charming that he stood still and listened .
this was rapunzel , who in her solitude passed her time in letting her sweet voice resound .
the king"s son wanted to climb up to her , and looked for the door of the tower , but none was to be found .
he rode home , but the singing had so deeply touched his heart , that every day he went out into the forest and listened to it .
once when he was thus standing behind a tree , he saw that an enchantress came there , and he heard how she cried : " rapunzel , rapunzel , let down your hair to me . "
then rapunzel let down the braids of her hair , and the enchantress climbed up to her .
" if that is the ladder by which one mounts , i too will try my fortune , " said he , and the next day when it began to grow dark , he went to the tower and cried : " rapunzel , rapunzel , let down your hair to me . "
immediately the hair fell down and the king"s son climbed up .
at first rapunzel was terribly frightened when a man , such as her eyes had never yet beheld , came to her ; but the king"s son began to talk to her quite like a friend , and told her that his heart had been so stirred that it had let him have no rest , and he had been forced to see her .
then rapunzel lost her fear , and when he asked her if she would take him for her husband , and she saw that he was young and handsome , she thought : " he will love me more than old dame gothel does " ; and she said yes , and laid her hand in his .
she said : " i will willingly go away with you , but i do not know how to get down .
bring with you a skein of silk every time that you come , and i will weave a ladder with it , and when that is ready i will descend , and you will take me on your horse . "
they agreed that until that time he should come to her every evening , for the old woman came by day .
the enchantress remarked nothing of this , until once rapunzel said to her : " tell me , dame gothel , how it happens that you are so much heavier for me to draw up than the young king"s son--he is with me in a moment . "
" ah ! you wicked child , " cried the enchantress .
" what do i hear you say !
i thought i had separated you from all the world , and yet you have deceived me ! "
in her anger she clutched rapunzel"s beautiful tresses , wrapped them twice round her left hand , seized a pair of scissors with the right , and snip , snap , they were cut off , and the lovely braids lay on the ground .
and she was so pitiless that she took poor rapunzel into a desert where she had to live in great grief and misery .
on the same day that she cast out rapunzel , however , the enchantress fastened the braids of hair , which she had cut off , to the hook of the window , and when the king"s son came and cried : " rapunzel , rapunzel , let down your hair to me . " she let the hair down .
the king"s son ascended , but instead of finding his dearest rapunzel , he found the enchantress , who gazed at him with wicked and venomous looks .
" aha ! " she cried mockingly , " you would fetch your dearest , but the beautiful bird sits no longer singing in the nest ; the cat has got it , and will scratch out your eyes as well .
rapunzel is lost to you ; you will never see her again . "
the king"s son was beside himself with pain , and in his despair he leapt down from the tower .
he escaped with his life , but the thorns into which he fell pierced his eyes .
then he wandered quite blind about the forest , ate nothing but roots and berries , and did naught but lament and weep over the loss of his dearest wife .
thus he roamed about in misery for some years , and at length came to the desert where rapunzel , with the twins to which she had given birth , a boy and a girl , lived in wretchedness .
he heard a voice , and it seemed so familiar to him that he went towards it , and when he approached , rapunzel knew him and fell on his neck and wept .
two of her tears wetted his eyes and they grew clear again , and he could see with them as before .
he led her to his kingdom where he was joyfully received , and they lived for a long time afterwards , happy and contented .
there was once a forester who went into the forest to hunt , and as he entered it he heard a sound of screaming as if a little child were there .
he followed the sound , and at last came to a high tree , and at the top of this a little child was sitting , for the mother had fallen asleep under the tree with the child , and a bird of prey had seen it in her arms , had flown down , snatched it away , and set it on the high tree .
the forester climbed up , brought the child down , and thought to himself : " you will take him home with you , and bring him up with your lina . "
he took it home , therefore , and the two children grew up together .
and the one , which he had found on a tree was called fundevogel , because a bird had carried it away .
fundevogel and lina loved each other so dearly that when they did not see each other they were sad .
now the forester had an old cook , who one evening took two pails and began to fetch water , and did not go once only , but many times , out to the spring .
lina saw this and said , " listen , old sanna , why are you fetching so much water ? "
" if you will never repeat it to anyone , i will tell you why . "
so lina said , no , she would never repeat it to anyone , and then the cook said : " early tomorrow morning , when the forester is out hunting , i will heat the water , and when it is boiling in the kettle , i will throw in fundevogel , and will boil him in it . "
early next morning the forester got up and went out hunting , and when he was gone the children were still in bed .
then lina said to fundevogel : " if you will never leave me , i too will never leave you . "
fundevogel said : " neither now , nor ever will i leave you . "
then said lina : " then will i tell you .
last night , old sanna carried so many buckets of water into the house that i asked her why she was doing that , and she said that if i would promise not to tell anyone , and she said that early tomorrow morning when father was out hunting , she would set the kettle full of water , throw you into it and boil you ; but we will get up quickly , dress ourselves , and go away together . "
the two children therefore got up , dressed themselves quickly , and went away .
when the water in the kettle was boiling , the cook went into the bedroom to fetch fundevogel and throw him into it .
but when she came in , and went to the beds , both the children were gone .
then she was terribly alarmed , and she said to herself : " what shall i say now when the forester comes home and sees that the children are gone ?
they must be followed instantly to get them back again . "
then the cook sent three servants after them , who were to run and overtake the children .
the children , however , were sitting outside the forest , and when they saw from afar the three servants running , lina said to fundevogel : " never leave me , and i will never leave you . "
fundevogel said : " neither now , nor ever . "
then said lina : " do you become a rose-tree , and i the rose upon it . "
when the three servants came to the forest , nothing was there but a rose-tree and one rose on it , but the children were nowhere .
then said they : " there is nothing to be done here , " and they went home and told the cook that they had seen nothing in the forest but a little rose-bush with one rose on it .
then the old cook scolded and said : " you simpletons , you should have cut the rose-bush in two , and have broken off the rose and brought it home with you ; go , and do it at once . "
they had therefore to go out and look for the second time .
the children , however , saw them coming from a distance .
then lina said : " fundevogel , never leave me , and i will never leave you . "
fundevogel said : " neither now ; nor ever . "
said lina : " then do you become a church , and i"ll be the chandelier in it . "
so when the three servants came , nothing was there but a church , with a chandelier in it .
they said therefore to each other : " what can we do here , let us go home . "
when they got home , the cook asked if they had not found them ; so they said no , they had found nothing but a church , and there was a chandelier in it .
and the cook scolded them and said : " you fools ! why did you not pull the church to pieces , and bring the chandelier home with you ? "
and now the old cook herself got on her legs , and went with the three servants in pursuit of the children .
the children , however , saw from afar that the three servants were coming , and the cook waddling after them then said lina : " fundevogel , never leave me , and i will never leave you . "
then said fundevogel : " neither now , nor ever . "
said lina : " be a fishpond , and i will be the duck upon it . "
the cook , however , came up to them , and when she saw the pond she lay down by it , and was about to drink it up .
but the duck swam quickly to her , seized her head in its beak and drew her into the water , and there the old witch had to drown .
then the children went home together , and were heartily delighted , and if they have not died , they are living still .
one summer"s morning a little tailor was sitting on his table by the window ; he was in good spirits , and sewed with all his might .
then came a peasant woman down the street crying : " good jams , cheap !
good jams , cheap ! "
this rang pleasantly in the tailor"s ears ; he stretched his delicate head out of the window , and called : " come up here , dear woman ; here you will get rid of your goods . "
the woman came up the three steps to the tailor with her heavy basket , and he made her unpack all the pots for him he inspected each one , lifted it up , put his nose to it , and at length said : " the jam seems to me to be good , so weigh me out four ounces , dear woman , and if it is a quarter of a pound that is of no consequence . "
the woman who had hoped to find a good sale , gave him what he desired , but went away quite angry and grumbling .
" now , this jam shall be blessed by god , " cried the little tailor , " and give me health and strength " ; so he brought the bread out of the cupboard , cut himself a piece right across the loaf and spread the jam over it .
" this won"t taste bitter , " said he , " but i will just finish the jacket before i take a bite . "
he laid the bread near him , sewed on , and in his joy , made bigger and bigger stitches .
in the meantime the smell of the sweet jam rose to where the flies were sitting in great numbers , and they were attracted and descended on it in hosts .
" hi ! who invited you ? " said the little tailor , and drove the unbidden guests away .
the flies , however , who understood no german , would not be turned away , but came back again in ever-increasing companies .
the little tailor at last lost all patience , and drew a piece of cloth from the hole under his work-table , and saying : " wait , and i will give it to you , " struck it mercilessly on them when he drew it away and counted , there lay before him no fewer than seven , dead and with legs stretched out .
" are you a fellow of that sort ? " said he , and could not help admiring his own bravery .
" the whole town shall know of this ! "
and the little tailor hastened to cut himself a girdle , stitched it , and embroidered on it in large letters : " seven at one stroke ! "
" what , the town ! " he continued , " the whole world shall hear of it ! " and his heart wagged with joy like a lamb"s tail .
the tailor put on the girdle , and resolved to go forth into the world , because he thought his workshop was too small for his valour .
before he went away , he sought about in the house to see if there was anything which he could take with him ; however , he found nothing but an old cheese , and that he put in his pocket .
in front of the door he observed a bird which had caught itself in the thicket .
it had to go into his pocket with the cheese .
now he took to the road boldly , and as he was light and nimble , he felt no fatigue .
the road led him up a mountain , and when he had reached the highest point of it , there sat a powerful giant looking peacefully about him the little tailor went bravely up , spoke to him , and said : " good day , comrade , so you are sitting there overlooking the wide-spread world !
i am just on my way thither , and want to try my luck .
have you any inclination to go with me ? "
the giant looked contemptuously at the tailor , and said : " you ragamuffin !
you miserable creature ! "
" oh , indeed ? " answered the little tailor , and unbuttoned his coat , and showed the giant the girdle , " there may you read what kind of a man i am ! "
the giant read : " seven at one stroke , " and thought that they had been men whom the tailor had killed , and began to feel a little respect for the tiny fellow .
nevertheless , he wished to try him first , and took a stone in his hand and squeezed it together so that water dropped out of it .
" do that likewise , " said the giant , " if you have strength . "
" is that all ? " said the tailor , " that is child"s play with us ! " and put his hand into his pocket , brought out the soft cheese , and pressed it until the liquid ran out of it .
" faith , " said he , " that was a little better , wasn"t it ? "
the giant did not know what to say , and could not believe it of the little man .
then the giant picked up a stone and threw it so high that the eye could scarcely follow it .
" now , little mite of a man , do that likewise , " " well thrown , " said the tailor , " but after all the stone came down to earth again ; i will throw you one which shall never come back at all , " and he put his hand into his pocket , took out the bird , and threw it into the air .
the bird , delighted with its liberty , rose , flew away and did not come back .
" how does that shot please you , comrade ? " asked the tailor .
" you can certainly throw , " said the giant , " but now we will see if you are able to carry anything properly . "
he took the little tailor to a mighty oak tree which lay there felled on the ground , and said : " if you are strong enough , help me to carry the tree out of the forest . "
" readily , " answered the little man ; " take you the trunk on your shoulders , and i will raise up the branches and twigs ; after all , they are the heaviest . "
the giant took the trunk on his shoulder , but the tailor seated himself on a branch , and the giant , who could not look round , had to carry away the whole tree , and the little tailor into the bargain : he behind , was quite merry and happy , and whistled the song : " three tailors rode forth from the gate , " as if carrying the tree were child"s play .
the giant , after he had dragged the heavy burden part of the way , could go no further , and cried : " hark you , i shall have to let the tree fall ! "
the tailor sprang nimbly down , seized the tree with both arms as if he had been carrying it , and said to the giant : " you are such a great fellow , and yet cannot even carry the tree ! "
they went on together , and as they passed a cherry-tree , the giant laid hold of the top of the tree where the ripest fruit was hanging , bent it down , gave it into the tailor"s hand , and bade him eat .
but the little tailor was much too weak to hold the tree , and when the giant let it go , it sprang back again , and the tailor was tossed into the air with it .
when he had fallen down again without injury , the giant said : " what is this ?
have you not strength enough to hold the weak twig ? "
" there is no lack of strength , " answered the little tailor .
" do you think that could be anything to a man who has struck down seven at one blow ?
i leapt over the tree because the huntsmen are shooting down there in the thicket .
jump as i did , if you can do it . "
the giant made the attempt but he could not get over the tree , and remained hanging in the branches , so that in this also the tailor kept the upper hand .
the giant said : " if you are such a valiant fellow , come with me into our cavern and spend the night with us . "
the little tailor was willing , and followed him when they went into the cave , other giants were sitting there by the fire , and each of them had a roasted sheep in his hand and was eating it .
the little tailor looked round and thought : " it is much more spacious here than in my workshop . "
the giant showed him a bed , and said he was to lie down in it and sleep .
the bed , however , was too big for the little tailor ; he did not lie down in it , but crept into a corner .
when it was midnight , and the giant thought that the little tailor was lying in a sound sleep , he got up , took a great iron bar , cut through the bed with one blow , and thought he had finished off the grasshopper for good .
with the earliest dawn the giants went into the forest , and had quite forgotten the little tailor , when all at once he walked up to them quite merrily and boldly .
the giants were terrified , they were afraid that he would strike them all dead , and ran away in a great hurry .
the little tailor went onwards , always following his own pointed nose .
after he had walked for a long time , he came to the courtyard of a royal palace , and as he felt weary , he lay down on the grass and fell asleep .
whilst he lay there , the people came and inspected him on all sides , and read on his girdle : " seven at one stroke . "
" ah ! " said they , " what does the great warrior want here in the midst of peace ?
he must be a mighty lord . "
they went and announced him to the king , and gave it as their opinion that if war should break out , this would be a weighty and useful man who ought on no account to be allowed to depart .
the counsel pleased the king , and he sent one of his courtiers to the little tailor to offer him military service when he awoke .
the ambassador remained standing by the sleeper , waited until he stretched his limbs and opened his eyes , and then conveyed to him this proposal .
" for this very reason have i come here , " the tailor replied , " i am ready to enter the king"s service . "
he was therefore honourably received , and a special dwelling was assigned him the soldiers , however , were set against the little tailor , and wished him a thousand miles away .
" what is to be the end of this ? " they said among themselves .
" if we quarrel with him , and he strikes about him , seven of us will fall at every blow ; not one of us can stand against him " they came therefore to a decision , betook themselves in a body to the king , and begged for their dismissal .
" we are not prepared , " said they , " to stay with a man who kills seven at one stroke . "
the king was sorry that for the sake of one he should lose all his faithful servants , wished that he had never set eyes on the tailor , and would willingly have been rid of him again .
but he did not venture to give him his dismissal , for he dreaded lest he should strike him and all his people dead , and place himself on the royal throne .
he thought about it for a long time , and at last found good counsel .
he sent to the little tailor and caused him to be informed that as he was a great warrior , he had one request to make to him in a forest of his country lived two giants , who caused great mischief with their robbing , murdering , ravaging , and burning , and no one could approach them without putting himself in danger of death .
if the tailor conquered and killed these two giants , he would give him his only daughter to wife , and half of his kingdom as a dowry , likewise one hundred horsemen should go with him to assist him " that would indeed be a fine thing for a man like me ! " thought the little tailor .
" one is not offered a beautiful princess and half a kingdom every day of one"s life ! "
" oh , yes , " he replied , " i will soon subdue the giants , and do not require the help of the hundred horsemen to do it ; he who can hit seven with one blow has no need to be afraid of two . "
the little tailor went forth , and the hundred horsemen followed him when he came to the outskirts of the forest , he said to his followers : " just stay waiting here , i alone will soon finish off the giants . "
then he bounded into the forest and looked about right and left .
after a while he perceived both giants .
they lay sleeping under a tree , and snored so that the branches waved up and down .
the little tailor , not idle , gathered two pocketsful of stones , and with these climbed up the tree .
when he was halfway up , he slipped down by a branch , until he sat just above the sleepers , and then let one stone after another fall on the breast of one of the giants .
for a long time the giant felt nothing , but at last he awoke , pushed his comrade , and said : " why are you knocking me ? "
" you must be dreaming , " said the other , " i am not knocking you . "
they laid themselves down to sleep again , and then the tailor threw a stone down on the second .
" what is the meaning of this ? " cried the other " why are you pelting me ? "
" i am not pelting you , " answered the first , growling .
they disputed about it for a time , but as they were weary they let the matter rest , and their eyes closed once more .
the little tailor began his game again , picked out the biggest stone , and threw it with all his might on the breast of the first giant .
" that is too bad ! " cried he , and sprang up like a madman , and pushed his companion against the tree until it shook .
the other paid him back in the same coin , and they got into such a rage that they tore up trees and belaboured each other so long , that at last they both fell down dead on the ground at the same time .
then the little tailor leapt down .
" it is a lucky thing , " said he , " that they did not tear up the tree on which i was sitting , or i should have had to sprint on to another like a squirrel ; but we tailors are nimble . "
he drew out his sword and gave each of them a couple of thrusts in the breast , and then went out to the horsemen and said : " the work is done ; i have finished both of them off , but it was hard work !
they tore up trees in their sore need , and defended themselves with them , but all that is to no purpose when a man like myself comes , who can kill seven at one blow . "
" but are you not wounded ? " asked the horsemen .
" you need not concern yourself about that , " answered the tailor , " they have not bent one hair of mine . "
the horsemen would not believe him , and rode into the forest ; there they found the giants swimming in their blood , and all round about lay the torn-up trees .
the little tailor demanded of the king the promised reward ; he , however , repented of his promise , and again bethought himself how he could get rid of the hero .
" before you receive my daughter , and the half of my kingdom , " said he to him , " you must perform one more heroic deed .
in the forest roams a unicorn which does great harm , and you must catch it first . "
" i fear one unicorn still less than two giants .
seven at one blow , is my kind of affair . "
he took a rope and an axe with him , went forth into the forest , and again bade those who were sent with him to wait outside .
he had not long to seek .
the unicorn soon came towards him , and rushed directly on the tailor , as if it would gore him with its horn without more ado .
" softly , softly ; it can"t be done as quickly as that , " said he , and stood still and waited until the animal was quite close , and then sprang nimbly behind the tree .
the unicorn ran against the tree with all its strength , and stuck its horn so fast in the trunk that it had not the strength enough to draw it out again , and thus it was caught .
" now , i have got the bird , " said the tailor , and came out from behind the tree and put the rope round its neck , and then with his axe he hewed the horn out of the tree , and when all was ready he led the beast away and took it to the king .
the king still would not give him the promised reward , and made a third demand .
before the wedding the tailor was to catch him a wild boar that made great havoc in the forest , and the huntsmen should give him their help .
" willingly , " said the tailor , " that is child"s play ! "
he did not take the huntsmen with him into the forest , and they were well pleased that he did not , for the wild boar had several times received them in such a manner that they had no inclination to lie in wait for him when the boar perceived the tailor , it ran on him with foaming mouth and whetted tusks , and was about to throw him to the ground , but the hero fled and sprang into a chapel which was near and up to the window at once , and in one bound out again .
the boar ran after him , but the tailor ran round outside and shut the door behind it , and then the raging beast , which was much too heavy and awkward to leap out of the window , was caught .
the little tailor called the huntsmen thither that they might see the prisoner with their own eyes .
the hero , however , went to the king , who was now , whether he liked it or not , obliged to keep his promise , and gave his daughter and the half of his kingdom had he known that it was no warlike hero , but a little tailor who was standing before him , it would have gone to his heart still more than it did .
the wedding was held with great magnificence and small joy , and out of a tailor a king was made .
after some time the young queen heard her husband say in his dreams at night : " boy , make me the doublet , and patch the pantaloons , or else i will rap the yard-measure over your ears . "
then she discovered in what state of life the young lord had been born , and next morning complained of her wrongs to her father , and begged him to help her to get rid of her husband , who was nothing else but a tailor .
the king comforted her and said : " leave your bedroom door open this night , and my servants shall stand outside , and when he has fallen asleep shall go in , bind him , and take him on board a ship which shall carry him into the wide world . "
the woman was satisfied with this ; but the king"s armour-bearer , who had heard all , was friendly with the young lord , and informed him of the whole plot .
" i"ll put a screw into that business , " said the little tailor .
at night he went to bed with his wife at the usual time , and when she thought that he had fallen asleep , she got up , opened the door , and then lay down again .
the little tailor , who was only pretending to be asleep , began to cry out in a clear voice : " boy , make me the doublet and patch me the pantaloons , or i will rap the yard-measure over your ears .
i smote seven at one blow .
i killed two giants , i brought away one unicorn , and caught a wild boar , and am i to fear those who are standing outside the room " when these men heard the tailor speaking thus , they were overcome by a great dread , and ran as if the wild huntsman were behind them , and none of them would venture anything further against him so the little tailor was and remained a king to the end of his life .
hard by a great forest dwelt a poor wood-cutter with his wife and his two children .
the boy was called hansel and the girl gretel .
he had little to bite and to break , and once when great dearth fell on the land , he could no longer procure even daily bread .
now when he thought over this by night in his bed , and tossed about in his anxiety , he groaned and said to his wife : " what is to become of us ?
how are we to feed our poor children , when we no longer have anything even for ourselves ? "
" i"ll tell you what , husband , " answered the woman , " early tomorrow morning we will take the children out into the forest to where it is the thickest ; there we will light a fire for them , and give each of them one more piece of bread , and then we will go to our work and leave them alone .
they will not find the way home again , and we shall be rid of them " " no , wife , " said the man , " i will not do that ; how can i bear to leave my children alone in the forest?--the wild animals would soon come and tear them to pieces . "
" o , you fool ! " said she , " then we must all four die of hunger , you may as well plane the planks for our coffins , " and she left him no peace until he consented .
" but i feel very sorry for the poor children , all the same , " said the man .
the two children had also not been able to sleep for hunger , and had heard what their stepmother had said to their father .
gretel wept bitter tears , and said to hansel : " now all is over with us . "
" be quiet , gretel , " said hansel , " do not distress yourself , i will soon find a way to help us . "
and when the old folks had fallen asleep , he got up , put on his little coat , opened the door below , and crept outside .
the moon shone brightly , and the white pebbles which lay in front of the house glittered like real silver pennies .
hansel stooped and stuffed the little pocket of his coat with as many as he could get in .
then he went back and said to gretel : " be comforted , dear little sister , and sleep in peace , god will not forsake us , " and he lay down again in his bed .
when day dawned , but before the sun had risen , the woman came and awoke the two children , saying : " get up , you sluggards ! we are going into the forest to fetch wood . "
she gave each a little piece of bread , and said : " there is something for your dinner , but do not eat it up before then , for you will get nothing else . "
gretel took the bread under her apron , as hansel had the pebbles in his pocket .
then they all set out together on the way to the forest .
when they had walked a short time , hansel stood still and peeped back at the house , and did so again and again .
his father said : " hansel , what are you looking at there and staying behind for ?
pay attention , and do not forget how to use your legs . "
" ah , father , " said hansel , " i am looking at my little white cat , which is sitting up on the roof , and wants to say goodbye to me . "
the wife said : " fool , that is not your little cat , that is the morning sun which is shining on the chimneys . "
hansel , however , had not been looking back at the cat , but had been constantly throwing one of the white pebble-stones out of his pocket on the road .
when they had reached the middle of the forest , the father said : " now , children , pile up some wood , and i will light a fire that you may not be cold . "
hansel and gretel gathered brushwood together , as high as a little hill .
the brushwood was lighted , and when the flames were burning very high , the woman said : " now , children , lay yourselves down by the fire and rest , we will go into the forest and cut some wood .
when we have done , we will come back and fetch you away . "
hansel and gretel sat by the fire , and when noon came , each ate a little piece of bread , and as they heard the strokes of the wood-axe they believed that their father was near .
it was not the axe , however , but a branch which he had fastened to a withered tree which the wind was blowing backwards and forwards .
and as they had been sitting such a long time , their eyes closed with fatigue , and they fell fast asleep .
when at last they awoke , it was already dark night .
gretel began to cry and said : " how are we to get out of the forest now ? "
but hansel comforted her and said : " just wait a little , until the moon has risen , and then we will soon find the way . "
and when the full moon had risen , hansel took his little sister by the hand , and followed the pebbles which shone like newly-coined silver pieces , and showed them the way .
they walked the whole night long , and by break of day came once more to their father"s house .
they knocked at the door , and when the woman opened it and saw that it was hansel and gretel , she said : " you naughty children , why have you slept so long in the forest?--we thought you were never coming back at all ! "
the father , however , rejoiced , for it had cut him to the heart to leave them behind alone .
not long afterwards , there was once more great dearth throughout the land , and the children heard their mother saying at night to their father : " everything is eaten again , we have one half loaf left , and that is the end .
the children must go , we will take them farther into the wood , so that they will not find their way out again ; there is no other means of saving ourselves ! "
the man"s heart was heavy , and he thought : " it would be better for you to share the last mouthful with your children . "
the woman , however , would listen to nothing that he had to say , but scolded and reproached him he who says a must say b , likewise , and as he had yielded the first time , he had to do so a second time also .
the children , however , were still awake and had heard the conversation .
when the old folks were asleep , hansel again got up , and wanted to go out and pick up pebbles as he had done before , but the woman had locked the door , and hansel could not get out .
nevertheless he comforted his little sister , and said : " do not cry , gretel , go to sleep quietly , the good god will help us . "
early in the morning came the woman , and took the children out of their beds .
their piece of bread was given to them , but it was still smaller than the time before .
on the way into the forest hansel crumbled his in his pocket , and often stood still and threw a morsel on the ground .
" hansel , why do you stop and look round ? " said the father , " go on . "
" i am looking back at my little pigeon which is sitting on the roof , and wants to say goodbye to me , " answered hansel .
" fool ! " said the woman , " that is not your little pigeon , that is the morning sun that is shining on the chimney . "
hansel , however little by little , threw all the crumbs on the path .
the woman led the children still deeper into the forest , where they had never in their lives been before .
then a great fire was again made , and the mother said : " just sit there , you children , and when you are tired you may sleep a little ; we are going into the forest to cut wood , and in the evening when we are done , we will come and fetch you away . "
when it was noon , gretel shared her piece of bread with hansel , who had scattered his by the way .
then they fell asleep and evening passed , but no one came to the poor children .
they did not awake until it was dark night , and hansel comforted his little sister and said : " just wait , gretel , until the moon rises , and then we shall see the crumbs of bread which i have strewn about , they will show us our way home again . "
when the moon came they set out , but they found no crumbs , for the many thousands of birds which fly about in the woods and fields had picked them all up .
hansel said to gretel : " we shall soon find the way , " but they did not find it .
they walked the whole night and all the next day too from morning till evening , but they did not get out of the forest , and were very hungry , for they had nothing to eat but two or three berries , which grew on the ground .
and as they were so weary that their legs would carry them no longer , they lay down beneath a tree and fell asleep .
it was now three mornings since they had left their father"s house .
they began to walk again , but they always came deeper into the forest , and if help did not come soon , they must die of hunger and weariness .
when it was mid-day , they saw a beautiful snow-white bird sitting on a bough , which sang so delightfully that they stood still and listened to it .
and when its song was over , it spread its wings and flew away before them , and they followed it until they reached a little house , on the roof of which it alighted ; and when they approached the little house they saw that it was built of bread and covered with cakes , but that the windows were of clear sugar .
" we will set to work on that , " said hansel , " and have a good meal .
i will eat a bit of the roof , and you gretel , can eat some of the window , it will taste sweet . "
hansel reached up above , and broke off a little of the roof to try how it tasted , and gretel leant against the window and nibbled at the panes .
then a soft voice cried from the parlour : " nibble , nibble , gnaw , who is nibbling at my little house ? "
the children answered : " the wind , the wind , the heaven-born wind , " and went on eating without disturbing themselves .
hansel , who liked the taste of the roof , tore down a great piece of it , and gretel pushed out the whole of one round window-pane , sat down , and enjoyed herself with it .
suddenly the door opened , and a woman as old as the hills , who supported herself on crutches , came creeping out .
hansel and gretel were so terribly frightened that they let fall what they had in their hands .
the old woman , however , nodded her head , and said : " oh , you dear children , who has brought you here ? do come in , and stay with me .
no harm shall happen to you . "
she took them both by the hand , and led them into her little house .
then good food was set before them , milk and pancakes , with sugar , apples , and nuts .
afterwards two pretty little beds were covered with clean white linen , and hansel and gretel lay down in them , and thought they were in heaven .
the old woman had only pretended to be so kind ; she was in reality a wicked witch , who lay in wait for children , and had only built the little house of bread in order to entice them there .
when a child fell into her power , she killed it , cooked and ate it , and that was a feast day with her .
witches have red eyes , and cannot see far , but they have a keen scent like the beasts , and are aware when human beings draw near .
when hansel and gretel came into her neighbourhood , she laughed with malice , and said mockingly : " i have them , they shall not escape me again ! "
early in the morning before the children were awake , she was already up , and when she saw both of them sleeping and looking so pretty , with their plump and rosy cheeks she muttered to herself : " that will be a dainty mouthful ! "
then she seized hansel with her shrivelled hand , carried him into a little stable , and locked him in behind a grated door .
scream as he might , it would not help him then she went to gretel , shook her till she awoke , and cried : " get up , lazy thing , fetch some water , and cook something good for your brother , he is in the stable outside , and is to be made fat .
when he is fat , i will eat him " gretel began to weep bitterly , but it was all in vain , for she was forced to do what the wicked witch commanded .
and now the best food was cooked for poor hansel , but gretel got nothing but crab-shells .
every morning the woman crept to the little stable , and cried : " hansel , stretch out your finger that i may feel if you will soon be fat . "
hansel , however , stretched out a little bone to her , and the old woman , who had dim eyes , could not see it , and thought it was hansel"s finger , and was astonished that there was no way of fattening him when four weeks had gone by , and hansel still remained thin , she was seized with impatience and would not wait any longer .
" now , then , gretel , " she cried to the girl , " stir yourself , and bring some water .
let hansel be fat or lean , tomorrow i will kill him , and cook him " ah , how the poor little sister did lament when she had to fetch the water , and how her tears did flow down her cheeks !
" dear god , do help us , " she cried .
" if the wild beasts in the forest had but devoured us , we should at any rate have died together . "
" just keep your noise to yourself , " said the old woman , " it won"t help you at all . "
early in the morning , gretel had to go out and hang up the cauldron with the water , and light the fire .
" we will bake first , " said the old woman , " i have already heated the oven , and kneaded the dough . "
she pushed poor gretel out to the oven , from which flames of fire were already darting .
" creep in , " said the witch , " and see if it is properly heated , so that we can put the bread in . "
and once gretel was inside , she intended to shut the oven and let her bake in it , and then she would eat her , too .
but gretel saw what she had in mind , and said : " i do not know how i am to do it ; how do i get in ? "
" silly goose , " said the old woman .
" the door is big enough ; just look , i can get in myself ! " and she crept up and thrust her head into the oven .
then gretel gave her a push that drove her far into it , and shut the iron door , and fastened the bolt .
oh ! then she began to howl quite horribly , but gretel ran away and the godless witch was miserably burnt to death .
gretel , however , ran like lightning to hansel , opened his little stable , and cried : " hansel , we are saved !
the old witch is dead ! "
then hansel sprang like a bird from its cage when the door is opened .
how they did rejoice and embrace each other , and dance about and kiss each other !
and as they had no longer any need to fear her , they went into the witch"s house , and in every corner there stood chests full of pearls and jewels .
" these are far better than pebbles ! " said hansel , and thrust into his pockets whatever could be got in , and gretel said : " i , too , will take something home with me , " and filled her pinafore full .
" but now we must be off , " said hansel , " that we may get out of the witch"s forest . "
when they had walked for two hours , they came to a great stretch of water .
" we cannot cross , " said hansel , " i see no foot-plank , and no bridge . "
" and there is also no ferry , " answered gretel , " but a white duck is swimming there : if i ask her , she will help us over . "
then she cried : " little duck , little duck , dost thou see , hansel and gretel are waiting for thee ?
there"s never a plank , or bridge in sight , take us across on thy back so white . "
the duck came to them , and hansel seated himself on its back , and told his sister to sit by him " no , " replied gretel , " that will be too heavy for the little duck ; she shall take us across , one after the other . "
the good little duck did so , and when they were once safely across and had walked for a short time , the forest seemed to be more and more familiar to them , and at length they saw from afar their father"s house .
then they began to run , rushed into the parlour , and threw themselves round their father"s neck .
the man had not known one happy hour since he had left the children in the forest ; the woman , however , was dead .
gretel emptied her pinafore until pearls and precious stones ran about the room , and hansel threw one handful after another out of his pocket to add to them then all anxiety was at an end , and they lived together in perfect happiness .
my tale is done , there runs a mouse ; whosoever catches it , may make himself a big fur cap out of it .
once upon a time , a mouse , a bird , and a sausage , entered into partnership and set up house together .
for a long time all went well ; they lived in great comfort , and prospered so far as to be able to add considerably to their stores .
the bird"s duty was to fly daily into the wood and bring in fuel ; the mouse fetched the water , and the sausage saw to the cooking .
when people are too well off they always begin to long for something new .
and so it came to pass , that the bird , while out one day , met a fellow bird , to whom he boastfully expatiated on the excellence of his household arrangements .
but the other bird sneered at him for being a poor simpleton , who did all the hard work , while the other two stayed at home and had a good time of it .
for , when the mouse had made the fire and fetched in the water , she could retire into her little room and rest until it was time to set the table .
the sausage had only to watch the pot to see that the food was properly cooked , and when it was near dinner-time , he just threw himself into the broth , or rolled in and out among the vegetables three or four times , and there they were , buttered , and salted , and ready to be served .
then , when the bird came home and had laid aside his burden , they sat down to table , and when they had finished their meal , they could sleep their fill till the following morning : and that was really a very delightful life .
influenced by those remarks , the bird next morning refused to bring in the wood , telling the others that he had been their servant long enough , and had been a fool into the bargain , and that it was now time to make a change , and to try some other way of arranging the work .
beg and pray as the mouse and the sausage might , it was of no use ; the bird remained master of the situation , and the venture had to be made .
they therefore drew lots , and it fell to the sausage to bring in the wood , to the mouse to cook , and to the bird to fetch the water .
and now what happened ?
the sausage started in search of wood , the bird made the fire , and the mouse put on the pot , and then these two waited till the sausage returned with the fuel for the following day .
but the sausage remained so long away , that they became uneasy , and the bird flew out to meet him he had not flown far , however , when he came across a dog who , having met the sausage , had regarded him as his legitimate booty , and so seized and swallowed him the bird complained to the dog of this bare-faced robbery , but nothing he said was of any avail , for the dog answered that he found false credentials on the sausage , and that was the reason his life had been forfeited .
he picked up the wood , and flew sadly home , and told the mouse all he had seen and heard .
they were both very unhappy , but agreed to make the best of things and to remain with one another .
so now the bird set the table , and the mouse looked after the food and , wishing to prepare it in the same way as the sausage , by rolling in and out among the vegetables to salt and butter them , she jumped into the pot ; but she stopped short long before she reached the bottom , having already parted not only with her skin and hair , but also with life .
presently the bird came in and wanted to serve up the dinner , but he could nowhere see the cook .
in his alarm and flurry , he threw the wood here and there about the floor , called and searched , but no cook was to be found .
then some of the wood that had been carelessly thrown down , caught fire and began to blaze .
the bird hastened to fetch some water , but his pail fell into the well , and he after it , and as he was unable to recover himself , he was drowned .
once upon a time there was a widow who had two daughters ; one of them was beautiful and industrious , the other ugly and lazy .
the mother , however , loved the ugly and lazy one best , because she was her own daughter , and so the other , who was only her stepdaughter , was made to do all the work of the house , and was quite the cinderella of the family .
her stepmother sent her out every day to sit by the well in the high road , there to spin until she made her fingers bleed .
now it chanced one day that some blood fell on to the spindle , and as the girl stopped over the well to wash it off , the spindle suddenly sprang out of her hand and fell into the well .
she ran home crying to tell of her misfortune , but her stepmother spoke harshly to her , and after giving her a violent scolding , said unkindly , " as you have let the spindle fall into the well you may go yourself and fetch it out . "
the girl went back to the well not knowing what to do , and at last in her distress she jumped into the water after the spindle .
she remembered nothing more until she awoke and found herself in a beautiful meadow , full of sunshine , and with countless flowers blooming in every direction .
she walked over the meadow , and presently she came upon a baker"s oven full of bread , and the loaves cried out to her , " take us out , take us out , or alas ! we shall be burnt to a cinder ; we were baked through long ago . "
so she took the bread-shovel and drew them all out .
she went on a little farther , till she came to a tree full of apples .
" shake me , shake me , i pray , " cried the tree ; " my apples , one and all , are ripe . "
so she shook the tree , and the apples came falling down upon her like rain ; but she continued shaking until there was not a single apple left upon it .
then she carefully gathered the apples together in a heap and walked on again .
the next thing she came to was a little house , and there she saw an old woman looking out , with such large teeth , that she was terrified , and turned to run away .
but the old woman called after her , " what are you afraid of , dear child ?
stay with me ; if you will do the work of my house properly for me , i will make you very happy .
you must be very careful , however , to make my bed in the right way , for i wish you always to shake it thoroughly , so that the feathers fly about ; then they say , down there in the world , that it is snowing ; for i am mother holle . "
the old woman spoke so kindly , that the girl summoned up courage and agreed to enter into her service .
she took care to do everything according to the old woman"s bidding and every time she made the bed she shook it with all her might , so that the feathers flew about like so many snowflakes .
the old woman was as good as her word : she never spoke angrily to her , and gave her roast and boiled meats every day .
so she stayed on with mother holle for some time , and then she began to grow unhappy .
she could not at first tell why she felt sad , but she became conscious at last of great longing to go home ; then she knew she was homesick , although she was a thousand times better off with mother holle than with her mother and sister .
after waiting awhile , she went to mother holle and said , " i am so homesick , that i cannot stay with you any longer , for although i am so happy here , i must return to my own people . "
then mother holle said , " i am pleased that you should want to go back to your own people , and as you have served me so well and faithfully , i will take you home myself . "
thereupon she led the girl by the hand up to a broad gateway .
the gate was opened , and as the girl passed through , a shower of gold fell upon her , and the gold clung to her , so that she was covered with it from head to foot .
" that is a reward for your industry , " said mother holle , and as she spoke she handed her the spindle which she had dropped into the well .
the gate was then closed , and the girl found herself back in the old world close to her mother"s house .
as she entered the courtyard , the cock who was perched on the well , called out : " cock-a-doodle-doo !
your golden daughter"s come back to you . "
then she went in to her mother and sister , and as she was so richly covered with gold , they gave her a warm welcome .
she related to them all that had happened , and when the mother heard how she had come by her great riches , she thought she should like her ugly , lazy daughter to go and try her fortune .
so she made the sister go and sit by the well and spin , and the girl pricked her finger and thrust her hand into a thorn-bush , so that she might drop some blood on to the spindle ; then she threw it into the well , and jumped in herself .
like her sister she awoke in the beautiful meadow , and walked over it till she came to the oven .
" take us out , take us out , or alas ! we shall be burnt to a cinder ; we were baked through long ago , " cried the loaves as before .
but the lazy girl answered , " do you think i am going to dirty my hands for you ? " and walked on .
presently she came to the apple-tree .
" shake me , shake me , i pray ; my apples , one and all , are ripe , " it cried .
but she only answered , " a nice thing to ask me to do , one of the apples might fall on my head , " and passed on .
at last she came to mother holle"s house , and as she had heard all about the large teeth from her sister , she was not afraid of them , and engaged herself without delay to the old woman .
the first day she was very obedient and industrious , and exerted herself to please mother holle , for she thought of the gold she should get in return .
the next day , however , she began to dawdle over her work , and the third day she was more idle still ; then she began to lie in bed in the mornings and refused to get up .
worse still , she neglected to make the old woman"s bed properly , and forgot to shake it so that the feathers might fly about .
so mother holle very soon got tired of her , and told her she might go .
the lazy girl was delighted at this , and thought to herself , " the gold will soon be mine . "
mother holle led her , as she had led her sister , to the broad gateway ; but as she was passing through , instead of the shower of gold , a great bucketful of pitch came pouring over her .
" that is in return for your services , " said the old woman , and she shut the gate .
so the lazy girl had to go home covered with pitch , and the cock on the well called out as she saw her : " cock-a-doodle-doo !
your dirty daughter"s come back to you . "
but , try what she would , she could not get the pitch off and it stuck to her as long as she lived .
once upon a time there was a dear little girl who was loved by everyone who looked at her , but most of all by her grandmother , and there was nothing that she would not have given to the child .
once she gave her a little cap of red velvet , which suited her so well that she would never wear anything else ; so she was always called " little red-cap . "
one day her mother said to her : " come , little red-cap , here is a piece of cake and a bottle of wine ; take them to your grandmother , she is ill and weak , and they will do her good .
set out before it gets hot , and when you are going , walk nicely and quietly and do not run off the path , or you may fall and break the bottle , and then your grandmother will get nothing ; and when you go into her room , don"t forget to say , " good morning " , and don"t peep into every corner before you do it . "
" i will take great care , " said little red-cap to her mother , and gave her hand on it .
the grandmother lived out in the wood , half a league from the village , and just as little red-cap entered the wood , a wolf met her .
red-cap did not know what a wicked creature he was , and was not at all afraid of him " good day , little red-cap , " said he .
" thank you kindly , wolf . "
" whither away so early , little red-cap ? "
" to my grandmother"s . "
" what have you got in your apron ? "
" cake and wine ; yesterday was baking-day , so poor sick grandmother is to have something good , to make her stronger . "
" where does your grandmother live , little red-cap ? "
" a good quarter of a league farther on in the wood ; her house stands under the three large oak-trees , the nut-trees are just below ; you surely must know it , " replied little red-cap .
the wolf thought to himself : " what a tender young creature ! what a nice plump mouthful--she will be better to eat than the old woman .
i must act craftily , so as to catch both . "
so he walked for a short time by the side of little red-cap , and then he said : " see , little red-cap , how pretty the flowers are about here--why do you not look round ?
i believe , too , that you do not hear how sweetly the little birds are singing ; you walk gravely along as if you were going to school , while everything else out here in the wood is merry . "
little red-cap raised her eyes , and when she saw the sunbeams dancing here and there through the trees , and pretty flowers growing everywhere , she thought : " suppose i take grandmother a fresh nosegay ; that would please her too .
it is so early in the day that i shall still get there in good time " ; and so she ran from the path into the wood to look for flowers .
and whenever she had picked one , she fancied that she saw a still prettier one farther on , and ran after it , and so got deeper and deeper into the wood .
meanwhile the wolf ran straight to the grandmother"s house and knocked at the door .
" who is there ? "
" little red-cap , " replied the wolf .
" she is bringing cake and wine ; open the door . "
" lift the latch , " called out the grandmother , " i am too weak , and cannot get up . "
the wolf lifted the latch , the door sprang open , and without saying a word he went straight to the grandmother"s bed , and devoured her .
then he put on her clothes , dressed himself in her cap laid himself in bed and drew the curtains .
little red-cap , however , had been running about picking flowers , and when she had gathered so many that she could carry no more , she remembered her grandmother , and set out on the way to her .
she was surprised to find the cottage-door standing open , and when she went into the room , she had such a strange feeling that she said to herself : " oh dear ! how uneasy i feel today , and at other times i like being with grandmother so much . "
she called out : " good morning , " but received no answer ; so she went to the bed and drew back the curtains .
there lay her grandmother with her cap pulled far over her face , and looking very strange .
" oh ! grandmother , " she said , " what big ears you have ! "
" the better to hear you with , my child , " was the reply .
" but , grandmother , what big eyes you have ! " she said .
" the better to see you with , my dear . "
" but , grandmother , what large hands you have ! "
" the better to hug you with . "
" oh ! but , grandmother , what a terrible big mouth you have ! "
" the better to eat you with ! "
and scarcely had the wolf said this , than with one bound he was out of bed and swallowed up red-cap .
when the wolf had appeased his appetite , he lay down again in the bed , fell asleep and began to snore very loud .
the huntsman was just passing the house , and thought to himself : " how the old woman is snoring !
i must just see if she wants anything . "
so he went into the room , and when he came to the bed , he saw that the wolf was lying in it .
" do i find you here , you old sinner ! " said he .
" i have long sought you ! "
then just as he was going to fire at him , it occurred to him that the wolf might have devoured the grandmother , and that she might still be saved , so he did not fire , but took a pair of scissors , and began to cut open the stomach of the sleeping wolf .
when he had made two snips , he saw the little red-cap shining , and then he made two snips more , and the little girl sprang out , crying : " ah , how frightened i have been !
how dark it was inside the wolf " ; and after that the aged grandmother came out alive also , but scarcely able to breathe .
red-cap , however , quickly fetched great stones with which they filled the wolf"s belly , and when he awoke , he wanted to run away , but the stones were so heavy that he collapsed at once , and fell dead .
then all three were delighted .
the huntsman drew off the wolf"s skin and went home with it ; the grandmother ate the cake and drank the wine which red-cap had brought , and revived , but red-cap thought to herself : " as long as i live , i will never by myself leave the path , to run into the wood , when my mother has forbidden me to do so . "
it also related that once when red-cap was again taking cakes to the old grandmother , another wolf spoke to her , and tried to entice her from the path .
red-cap , however , was on her guard , and went straight forward on her way , and told her grandmother that she had met the wolf , and that he had said " good morning " to her , but with such a wicked look in his eyes , that if they had not been on the public road she was certain he would have eaten her up .
" well , " said the grandmother , " we will shut the door , that he may not come in . "
soon afterwards the wolf knocked , and cried : " open the door , grandmother , i am little red-cap , and am bringing you some cakes . "
but they did not speak , or open the door , so the grey-beard stole twice or thrice round the house , and at last jumped on the roof , intending to wait until red-cap went home in the evening , and then to steal after her and devour her in the darkness .
but the grandmother saw what was in his thoughts .
in front of the house was a great stone trough , so she said to the child : " take the pail , red-cap ; i made some sausages yesterday , so carry the water in which i boiled them to the trough . "
red-cap carried until the great trough was quite full .
then the smell of the sausages reached the wolf , and he sniffed and peeped down , and at last stretched out his neck so far that he could no longer keep his footing and began to slip , and slipped down from the roof straight into the great trough , and was drowned .
but red-cap went joyously home , and no one ever did anything to harm her again .
there was once a miller who had one beautiful daughter , and as she was grown up , he was anxious that she should be well married and provided for .
he said to himself , " i will give her to the first suitable man who comes and asks for her hand . "
not long after a suitor appeared , and as he appeared to be very rich and the miller could see nothing in him with which to find fault , he betrothed his daughter to him but the girl did not care for the man as a girl ought to care for her betrothed husband .
she did not feel that she could trust him , and she could not look at him nor think of him without an inward shudder .
one day he said to her , " you have not yet paid me a visit , although we have been betrothed for some time . "
" i do not know where your house is , " she answered .
" my house is out there in the dark forest , " he said .
she tried to excuse herself by saying that she would not be able to find the way thither .
her betrothed only replied , " you must come and see me next sunday ; i have already invited guests for that day , and that you may not mistake the way , i will strew ashes along the path . "
when sunday came , and it was time for the girl to start , a feeling of dread came over her which she could not explain , and that she might be able to find her path again , she filled her pockets with peas and lentils to sprinkle on the ground as she went along .
on reaching the entrance to the forest she found the path strewed with ashes , and these she followed , throwing down some peas on either side of her at every step she took .
she walked the whole day until she came to the deepest , darkest part of the forest .
there she saw a lonely house , looking so grim and mysterious , that it did not please her at all .
she stepped inside , but not a soul was to be seen , and a great silence reigned throughout .
suddenly a voice cried : " turn back , turn back , young maiden fair , linger not in this murderers " lair . "
the girl looked up and saw that the voice came from a bird hanging in a cage on the wall .
again it cried : " turn back , turn back , young maiden fair , linger not in this murderers " lair . "
the girl passed on , going from room to room of the house , but they were all empty , and still she saw no one .
at last she came to the cellar , and there sat a very , very old woman , who could not keep her head from shaking .
" can you tell me , " asked the girl , " if my betrothed husband lives here ? "
" ah , you poor child , " answered the old woman , " what a place for you to come to !
this is a murderers " den .
you think yourself a promised bride , and that your marriage will soon take place , but it is with death that you will keep your marriage feast .
look , do you see that large cauldron of water which i am obliged to keep on the fire !
as soon as they have you in their power they will kill you without mercy , and cook and eat you , for they are eaters of men .
if i did not take pity on you and save you , you would be lost . "
thereupon the old woman led her behind a large cask , which quite hid her from view .
" keep as still as a mouse , " she said ; " do not move or speak , or it will be all over with you .
tonight , when the robbers are all asleep , we will flee together .
i have long been waiting for an opportunity to escape . "
the words were hardly out of her mouth when the godless crew returned , dragging another young girl along with them they were all drunk , and paid no heed to her cries and lamentations .
they gave her wine to drink , three glasses full , one of white wine , one of red , and one of yellow , and with that her heart gave way and she died .
then they tore off her dainty clothing , laid her on a table , and cut her beautiful body into pieces , and sprinkled salt upon it .
the poor betrothed girl crouched trembling and shuddering behind the cask , for she saw what a terrible fate had been intended for her by the robbers .
one of them now noticed a gold ring still remaining on the little finger of the murdered girl , and as he could not draw it off easily , he took a hatchet and cut off the finger ; but the finger sprang into the air , and fell behind the cask into the lap of the girl who was hiding there .
the robber took a light and began looking for it , but he could not find it .
" have you looked behind the large cask ? " said one of the others .
but the old woman called out , " come and eat your suppers , and let the thing be till tomorrow ; the finger won"t run away . "
" the old woman is right , " said the robbers , and they ceased looking for the finger and sat down .
the old woman then mixed a sleeping draught with their wine , and before long they were all lying on the floor of the cellar , fast asleep and snoring .
as soon as the girl was assured of this , she came from behind the cask .
she was obliged to step over the bodies of the sleepers , who were lying close together , and every moment she was filled with renewed dread lest she should awaken them but god helped her , so that she passed safely over them , and then she and the old woman went upstairs , opened the door , and hastened as fast as they could from the murderers " den .
they found the ashes scattered by the wind , but the peas and lentils had sprouted , and grown sufficiently above the ground , to guide them in the moonlight along the path .
all night long they walked , and it was morning before they reached the mill .
then the girl told her father all that had happened .
the day came that had been fixed for the marriage .
the bridegroom arrived and also a large company of guests , for the miller had taken care to invite all his friends and relations .
as they sat at the feast , each guest in turn was asked to tell a tale ; the bride sat still and did not say a word .
" and you , my love , " said the bridegroom , turning to her , " is there no tale you know ?
tell us something . "
" i will tell you a dream , then , " said the bride .
" i went alone through a forest and came at last to a house ; not a soul could i find within , but a bird that was hanging in a cage on the wall cried : " turn back , turn back , young maiden fair , linger not in this murderers " lair . " and again a second time it said these words . "
" my darling , this is only a dream " " i went on through the house from room to room , but they were all empty , and everything was so grim and mysterious .
at last i went down to the cellar , and there sat a very , very old woman , who could not keep her head still .
i asked her if my betrothed lived here , and she answered , " ah , you poor child , you are come to a murderers " den ; your betrothed does indeed live here , but he will kill you without mercy and afterwards cook and eat you . " " " my darling , this is only a dream " " the old woman hid me behind a large cask , and scarcely had she done this when the robbers returned home , dragging a young girl along with them they gave her three kinds of wine to drink , white , red , and yellow , and with that she died . "
" my darling , this is only a dream " " then they tore off her dainty clothing , and cut her beautiful body into pieces and sprinkled salt upon it . "
" my darling , this is only a dream " " and one of the robbers saw that there was a gold ring still left on her finger , and as it was difficult to draw off , he took a hatchet and cut off her finger ; but the finger sprang into the air and fell behind the great cask into my lap .
and here is the finger with the ring . "
and with these words the bride drew forth the finger and shewed it to the assembled guests .
the bridegroom , who during this recital had grown deadly pale , up and tried to escape , but the guests seized him and held him fast .
they delivered him up to justice , and he and all his murderous band were condemned to death for their wicked deeds .
a poor woodman sat in his cottage one night , smoking his pipe by the fireside , while his wife sat by his side spinning .
" how lonely it is , wife , " said he , as he puffed out a long curl of smoke , " for you and me to sit here by ourselves , without any children to play about and amuse us while other people seem so happy and merry with their children ! "
" what you say is very true , " said the wife , sighing , and turning round her wheel ; " how happy should i be if i had but one child !
if it were ever so small--nay , if it were no bigger than my thumb--i should be very happy , and love it dearly . "
now--odd as you may think it--it came to pass that this good woman"s wish was fulfilled , just in the very way she had wished it ; for , not long afterwards , she had a little boy , who was quite healthy and strong , but was not much bigger than my thumb .
so they said , " well , we cannot say we have not got what we wished for , and , little as he is , we will love him dearly . "
and they called him thomas thumb .
they gave him plenty of food , yet for all they could do he never grew bigger , but kept just the same size as he had been when he was born .
still , his eyes were sharp and sparkling , and he soon showed himself to be a clever little fellow , who always knew well what he was about .
one day , as the woodman was getting ready to go into the wood to cut fuel , he said , " i wish i had someone to bring the cart after me , for i want to make haste . "
" oh , father , " cried tom , " i will take care of that ; the cart shall be in the wood by the time you want it . "
then the woodman laughed , and said , " how can that be ? you cannot reach up to the horse"s bridle . "
" never mind that , father , " said tom ; " if my mother will only harness the horse , i will get into his ear and tell him which way to go . "
" well , " said the father , " we will try for once . "
when the time came the mother harnessed the horse to the cart , and put tom into his ear ; and as he sat there the little man told the beast how to go , crying out , " go on ! " and " stop ! " as he wanted : and thus the horse went on just as well as if the woodman had driven it himself into the wood .
it happened that as the horse was going a little too fast , and tom was calling out , " gently ! gently ! " two strangers came up .
" what an odd thing that is ! " said one : " there is a cart going along , and i hear a carter talking to the horse , but yet i can see no one . "
" that is queer , indeed , " said the other ; " let us follow the cart , and see where it goes . "
so they went on into the wood , till at last they came to the place where the woodman was .
then tom thumb , seeing his father , cried out , " see , father , here i am with the cart , all right and safe ! now take me down ! "
so his father took hold of the horse with one hand , and with the other took his son out of the horse"s ear , and put him down upon a straw , where he sat as merry as you please .
the two strangers were all this time looking on , and did not know what to say for wonder .
at last one took the other aside , and said , " that little urchin will make our fortune , if we can get him , and carry him about from town to town as a show ; we must buy him " so they went up to the woodman , and asked him what he would take for the little man .
" he will be better off , " said they , " with us than with you . "
" i won"t sell him at all , " said the father ; " my own flesh and blood is dearer to me than all the silver and gold in the world . "
but tom , hearing of the bargain they wanted to make , crept up his father"s coat to his shoulder and whispered in his ear , " take the money , father , and let them have me ; i"ll soon come back to you . "
so the woodman at last said he would sell tom to the strangers for a large piece of gold , and they paid the price .
" where would you like to sit ? " said one of them " oh , put me on the rim of your hat ; that will be a nice gallery for me ; i can walk about there and see the country as we go along . "
so they did as he wished ; and when tom had taken leave of his father they took him away with them they journeyed on till it began to be dusky , and then the little man said , " let me get down , i"m tired . "
so the man took off his hat , and put him down on a clod of earth , in a ploughed field by the side of the road .
but tom ran about amongst the furrows , and at last slipped into an old mouse-hole .
" good night , my masters ! " said he , " i"m off ! mind and look sharp after me the next time . "
then they ran at once to the place , and poked the ends of their sticks into the mouse-hole , but all in vain ; tom only crawled farther and farther in ; and at last it became quite dark , so that they were forced to go their way without their prize , as sulky as could be .
when tom found they were gone , he came out of his hiding-place .
" what dangerous walking it is , " said he , " in this ploughed field !
if i were to fall from one of these great clods , i should undoubtedly break my neck . "
at last , by good luck , he found a large empty snail-shell .
" this is lucky , " said he , " i can sleep here very well " ; and in he crept .
just as he was falling asleep , he heard two men passing by , chatting together ; and one said to the other , " how can we rob that rich parson"s house of his silver and gold ? "
" i"ll tell you ! " cried tom " what noise was that ? " said the thief , frightened ; " i"m sure i heard someone speak . "
they stood still listening , and tom said , " take me with you , and i"ll soon show you how to get the parson"s money . "
" but where are you ? " said they .
" look about on the ground , " answered he , " and listen where the sound comes from " at last the thieves found him out , and lifted him up in their hands .
" you little urchin ! " they said , " what can you do for us ? "
" why , i can get between the iron window-bars of the parson"s house , and throw you out whatever you want . "
" that"s a good thought , " said the thieves ; " come along , we shall see what you can do . "
when they came to the parson"s house , tom slipped through the window-bars into the room , and then called out as loud as he could bawl , " will you have all that is here ? "
at this the thieves were frightened , and said , " softly , softly !
speak low , that you may not awaken anybody . "
but tom seemed as if he did not understand them , and bawled out again , " how much will you have ?
shall i throw it all out ? "
now the cook lay in the next room ; and hearing a noise she raised herself up in her bed and listened .
meantime the thieves were frightened , and ran off a little way ; but at last they plucked up their hearts , and said , " the little urchin is only trying to make fools of us . "
so they came back and whispered softly to him , saying , " now let us have no more of your roguish jokes ; but throw us out some of the money . "
then tom called out as loud as he could , " very well ! hold your hands ! here it comes . "
the cook heard this quite plain , so she sprang out of bed , and ran to open the door .
the thieves ran off as if a wolf was at their tails : and the maid , having groped about and found nothing , went away for a light .
by the time she came back , tom had slipped off into the barn ; and when she had looked about and searched every hole and corner , and found nobody , she went to bed , thinking she must have been dreaming with her eyes open .
the little man crawled about in the hay-loft , and at last found a snug place to finish his night"s rest in ; so he laid himself down , meaning to sleep till daylight , and then find his way home to his father and mother .
but alas ! how woefully he was undone ! what crosses and sorrows happen to us all in this world !
the cook got up early , before daybreak , to feed the cows ; and going straight to the hay-loft , carried away a large bundle of hay , with the little man in the middle of it , fast asleep .
he still , however , slept on , and did not awake till he found himself in the mouth of the cow ; for the cook had put the hay into the cow"s rick , and the cow had taken tom up in a mouthful of it .
" good lack-a-day ! " said he , " how came i to tumble into the mill ? "
but he soon found out where he really was ; and was forced to have all his wits about him , that he might not get between the cow"s teeth , and so be crushed to death .
at last down he went into her stomach .
" it is rather dark , " said he ; " they forgot to build windows in this room to let the sun in ; a candle would be no bad thing . "
though he made the best of his bad luck , he did not like his quarters at all ; and the worst of it was , that more and more hay was always coming down , and the space left for him became smaller and smaller .
at last he cried out as loud as he could , " don"t bring me any more hay !
don"t bring me any more hay ! "
the maid happened to be just then milking the cow ; and hearing someone speak , but seeing nobody , and yet being quite sure it was the same voice that she had heard in the night , she was so frightened that she fell off her stool , and overset the milk-pail .
as soon as she could pick herself up out of the dirt , she ran off as fast as she could to her master the parson , and said , " sir , sir , the cow is talking ! "
but the parson said , " woman , thou art surely mad ! "
however , he went with her into the cow-house , to try and see what was the matter .
scarcely had they set foot on the threshold , when tom called out , " don"t bring me any more hay ! "
then the parson himself was frightened ; and thinking the cow was surely bewitched , told his man to kill her on the spot .
so the cow was killed , and cut up ; and the stomach , in which tom lay , was thrown out upon a dunghill .
tom soon set himself to work to get out , which was not a very easy task ; but at last , just as he had made room to get his head out , fresh ill-luck befell him a hungry wolf sprang out , and swallowed up the whole stomach , with tom in it , at one gulp , and ran away .
tom , however , was still not disheartened ; and thinking the wolf would not dislike having some chat with him as he was going along , he called out , " my good friend , i can show you a famous treat . "
" where"s that ? " said the wolf .
" in such and such a house , " said tom , describing his own father"s house .
" you can crawl through the drain into the kitchen and then into the pantry , and there you will find cakes , ham , beef , cold chicken , roast pig , apple-dumplings , and everything that your heart can wish . "
the wolf did not want to be asked twice ; so that very night he went to the house and crawled through the drain into the kitchen , and then into the pantry , and ate and drank there to his heart"s content .
as soon as he had had enough he wanted to get away ; but he had eaten so much that he could not go out by the same way he came in .
this was just what tom had reckoned upon ; and now he began to set up a great shout , making all the noise he could .
" will you be easy ? " said the wolf ; " you"ll awaken everybody in the house if you make such a clatter . "
" what"s that to me ? " said the little man ; " you have had your frolic , now i"ve a mind to be merry myself " ; and he began , singing and shouting as loud as he could .
the woodman and his wife , being awakened by the noise , peeped through a crack in the door ; but when they saw a wolf was there , you may well suppose that they were sadly frightened ; and the woodman ran for his axe , and gave his wife a scythe .
" do you stay behind , " said the woodman , " and when i have knocked him on the head you must rip him up with the scythe . "
tom heard all this , and cried out , " father , father !
i am here , the wolf has swallowed me . "
and his father said , " heaven be praised ! we have found our dear child again " ; and he told his wife not to use the scythe for fear she should hurt him then he aimed a great blow , and struck the wolf on the head , and killed him on the spot ! and when he was dead they cut open his body , and set tommy free .
" ah ! " said the father , " what fears we have had for you ! "
" yes , father , " answered he ; " i have travelled all over the world , i think , in one way or other , since we parted ; and now i am very glad to come home and get fresh air again . "
" why , where have you been ? " said his father .
" i have been in a mouse-hole--and in a snail-shell--and down a cow"s throat--and in the wolf"s belly ; and yet here i am again , safe and sound . "
" well , " said they , " you are come back , and we will not sell you again for all the riches in the world . "
then they hugged and kissed their dear little son , and gave him plenty to eat and drink , for he was very hungry ; and then they fetched new clothes for him , for his old ones had been quite spoiled on his journey .
so master thumb stayed at home with his father and mother , in peace ; for though he had been so great a traveller , and had done and seen so many fine things , and was fond enough of telling the whole story , he always agreed that , after all , there"s no place like home !
by the side of a wood , in a country a long way off , ran a fine stream of water ; and upon the stream there stood a mill .
the miller"s house was close by , and the miller , you must know , had a very beautiful daughter .
she was , moreover , very shrewd and clever ; and the miller was so proud of her , that he one day told the king of the land , who used to come and hunt in the wood , that his daughter could spin gold out of straw .
now this king was very fond of money ; and when he heard the miller"s boast his greediness was raised , and he sent for the girl to be brought before him then he led her to a chamber in his palace where there was a great heap of straw , and gave her a spinning-wheel , and said , " all this must be spun into gold before morning , as you love your life . "
it was in vain that the poor maiden said that it was only a silly boast of her father , for that she could do no such thing as spin straw into gold : the chamber door was locked , and she was left alone .
she sat down in one corner of the room , and began to bewail her hard fate ; when on a sudden the door opened , and a droll-looking little man hobbled in , and said , " good morrow to you , my good lass ; what are you weeping for ? "
" alas ! " said she , " i must spin this straw into gold , and i know not how . "
" what will you give me , " said the hobgoblin , " to do it for you ? "
" my necklace , " replied the maiden .
he took her at her word , and sat himself down to the wheel , and whistled and sang : " round about , round about , lo and behold !
reel away , reel away , straw into gold ! "
and round about the wheel went merrily ; the work was quickly done , and the straw was all spun into gold .
when the king came and saw this , he was greatly astonished and pleased ; but his heart grew still more greedy of gain , and he shut up the poor miller"s daughter again with a fresh task .
then she knew not what to do , and sat down once more to weep ; but the dwarf soon opened the door , and said , " what will you give me to do your task ? "
" the ring on my finger , " said she .
so her little friend took the ring , and began to work at the wheel again , and whistled and sang : " round about , round about , lo and behold !
reel away , reel away , straw into gold ! " till , long before morning , all was done again .
the king was greatly delighted to see all this glittering treasure ; but still he had not enough : so he took the miller"s daughter to a yet larger heap , and said , " all this must be spun tonight ; and if it is , you shall be my queen . "
as soon as she was alone that dwarf came in , and said , " what will you give me to spin gold for you this third time ? "
" i have nothing left , " said she .
" then say you will give me , " said the little man , " the first little child that you may have when you are queen . "
" that may never be , " thought the miller"s daughter : and as she knew no other way to get her task done , she said she would do what he asked .
round went the wheel again to the old song , and the manikin once more spun the heap into gold .
the king came in the morning , and , finding all he wanted , was forced to keep his word ; so he married the miller"s daughter , and she really became queen .
at the birth of her first little child she was very glad , and forgot the dwarf , and what she had said .
but one day he came into her room , where she was sitting playing with her baby , and put her in mind of it .
then she grieved sorely at her misfortune , and said she would give him all the wealth of the kingdom if he would let her off , but in vain ; till at last her tears softened him , and he said , " i will give you three days " grace , and if during that time you tell me my name , you shall keep your child . "
now the queen lay awake all night , thinking of all the odd names that she had ever heard ; and she sent messengers all over the land to find out new ones .
the next day the little man came , and she began with timothy , ichabod , benjamin , jeremiah , and all the names she could remember ; but to all and each of them he said , " madam , that is not my name . "
the second day she began with all the comical names she could hear of , bandy-legs , hunchback , crook-shanks , and so on ; but the little gentleman still said to every one of them , " madam , that is not my name . "
the third day one of the messengers came back , and said , " i have travelled two days without hearing of any other names ; but yesterday , as i was climbing a high hill , among the trees of the forest where the fox and the hare bid each other good night , i saw a little hut ; and before the hut burnt a fire ; and round about the fire a funny little dwarf was dancing upon one leg , and singing : " merrily the feast i"ll make .
today i"ll brew , tomorrow bake ; merrily i"ll dance and sing , for next day will a stranger bring .
little does my lady dream rumpelstiltskin is my name ! " when the queen heard this she jumped for joy , and as soon as her little friend came she sat down upon her throne , and called all her court round to enjoy the fun ; and the nurse stood by her side with the baby in her arms , as if it was quite ready to be given up .
then the little man began to chuckle at the thought of having the poor child , to take home with him to his hut in the woods ; and he cried out , " now , lady , what is my name ? "
" is it john ? " asked she .
" no , madam ! "
" is it tom ? "
" no , madam ! "
" is it jemmy ? "
" it is not . "
" can your name be rumpelstiltskin ? " said the lady slyly .
" some witch told you that!--some witch told you that ! " cried the little man , and dashed his right foot in a rage so deep into the floor , that he was forced to lay hold of it with both hands to pull it out .
then he made the best of his way off , while the nurse laughed and the baby crowed ; and all the court jeered at him for having had so much trouble for nothing , and said , " we wish you a very good morning , and a merry feast , mr rumplestiltskin ! "
there was once a cook named gretel , who wore shoes with red heels , and when she walked out with them on , she turned herself this way and that , was quite happy and thought : " you certainly are a pretty girl ! "
and when she came home she drank , in her gladness of heart , a draught of wine , and as wine excites a desire to eat , she tasted the best of whatever she was cooking until she was satisfied , and said : " the cook must know what the food is like . "
it came to pass that the master one day said to her : " gretel , there is a guest coming this evening ; prepare me two fowls very daintily . "
" i will see to it , master , " answered gretel .
she killed two fowls , scalded them , plucked them , put them on the spit , and towards evening set them before the fire , that they might roast .
the fowls began to turn brown , and were nearly ready , but the guest had not yet arrived .
then gretel called out to her master : " if the guest does not come , i must take the fowls away from the fire , but it will be a sin and a shame if they are not eaten the moment they are at their juiciest . "
the master said : " i will run myself , and fetch the guest . "
when the master had turned his back , gretel laid the spit with the fowls on one side , and thought : " standing so long by the fire there , makes one sweat and thirsty ; who knows when they will come ?
meanwhile , i will run into the cellar , and take a drink . "
she ran down , set a jug , said : " god bless it for you , gretel , " and took a good drink , and thought that wine should flow on , and should not be interrupted , and took yet another hearty draught .
then she went and put the fowls down again to the fire , basted them , and drove the spit merrily round .
but as the roast meat smelt so good , gretel thought : " something might be wrong , it ought to be tasted ! "
she touched it with her finger , and said : " ah ! how good fowls are !
it certainly is a sin and a shame that they are not eaten at the right time ! "
she ran to the window , to see if the master was not coming with his guest , but she saw no one , and went back to the fowls and thought : " one of the wings is burning !
i had better take it off and eat it . "
so she cut it off , ate it , and enjoyed it , and when she had done , she thought : " the other must go down too , or else master will observe that something is missing . "
when the two wings were eaten , she went and looked for her master , and did not see him it suddenly occurred to her : " who knows ?
they are perhaps not coming at all , and have turned in somewhere . "
then she said : " well , gretel , enjoy yourself , one fowl has been cut into , take another drink , and eat it up entirely ; when it is eaten you will have some peace , why should god"s good gifts be spoilt ? "
so she ran into the cellar again , took an enormous drink and ate up the one chicken in great glee .
when one of the chickens was swallowed down , and still her master did not come , gretel looked at the other and said : " what one is , the other should be likewise , the two go together ; what"s right for the one is right for the other ; i think if i were to take another draught it would do me no harm " so she took another hearty drink , and let the second chicken follow the first .
while she was making the most of it , her master came and cried : " hurry up , gretel , the guest is coming directly after me ! "
" yes , sir , i will soon serve up , " answered gretel .
meantime the master looked to see that the table was properly laid , and took the great knife , wherewith he was going to carve the chickens , and sharpened it on the steps .
presently the guest came , and knocked politely and courteously at the house-door .
gretel ran , and looked to see who was there , and when she saw the guest , she put her finger to her lips and said : " hush ! hush ! go away as quickly as you can , if my master catches you it will be the worse for you ; he certainly did ask you to supper , but his intention is to cut off your two ears .
just listen how he is sharpening the knife for it ! "
the guest heard the sharpening , and hurried down the steps again as fast as he could .
gretel was not idle ; she ran screaming to her master , and cried : " you have invited a fine guest ! "
" why , gretel ?
what do you mean by that ? "
" yes , " said she , " he has taken the chickens which i was just going to serve up , off the dish , and has run away with them ! "
" that"s a nice trick ! " said her master , and lamented the fine chickens .
" if he had but left me one , so that something remained for me to eat . "
he called to him to stop , but the guest pretended not to hear .
then he ran after him with the knife still in his hand , crying : " just one , just one , " meaning that the guest should leave him just one chicken , and not take both .
the guest , however , thought no otherwise than that he was to give up one of his ears , and ran as if fire were burning under him , in order to take them both with him
there was once a very old man , whose eyes had become dim , his ears dull of hearing , his knees trembled , and when he sat at table he could hardly hold the spoon , and spilt the broth upon the table-cloth or let it run out of his mouth .
his son and his son"s wife were disgusted at this , so the old grandfather at last had to sit in the corner behind the stove , and they gave him his food in an earthenware bowl , and not even enough of it .
and he used to look towards the table with his eyes full of tears .
once , too , his trembling hands could not hold the bowl , and it fell to the ground and broke .
the young wife scolded him , but he said nothing and only sighed .
then they brought him a wooden bowl for a few half-pence , out of which he had to eat .
they were once sitting thus when the little grandson of four years old began to gather together some bits of wood upon the ground .
" what are you doing there ? " asked the father .
" i am making a little trough , " answered the child , " for father and mother to eat out of when i am big . "
the man and his wife looked at each other for a while , and presently began to cry .
then they took the old grandfather to the table , and henceforth always let him eat with them , and likewise said nothing if he did spill a little of anything .
there was a certain village wherein no one lived but really rich peasants , and just one poor one , whom they called the little peasant .
he had not even so much as a cow , and still less money to buy one , and yet he and his wife did so wish to have one .
one day he said to her : " listen , i have a good idea , there is our gossip the carpenter , he shall make us a wooden calf , and paint it brown , so that it looks like any other , and in time it will certainly get big and be a cow . " the woman also liked the idea , and their gossip the carpenter cut and planed the calf , and painted it as it ought to be , and made it with its head hanging down as if it were eating .
next morning when the cows were being driven out , the little peasant called the cow-herd in and said : " look , i have a little calf there , but it is still small and has to be carried . "
the cow-herd said : " all right , " and took it in his arms and carried it to the pasture , and set it among the grass .
the little calf always remained standing like one which was eating , and the cow-herd said : " it will soon run by itself , just look how it eats already ! "
at night when he was going to drive the herd home again , he said to the calf : " if you can stand there and eat your fill , you can also go on your four legs ; i don"t care to drag you home again in my arms " but the little peasant stood at his door , and waited for his little calf , and when the cow-herd drove the cows through the village , and the calf was missing , he inquired where it was .
the cow-herd answered : " it is still standing out there eating .
it would not stop and come with us . "
but the little peasant said : " oh , but i must have my beast back again . "
then they went back to the meadow together , but someone had stolen the calf , and it was gone .
the cow-herd said : " it must have run away . "
the peasant , however , said : " don"t tell me that , " and led the cow-herd before the mayor , who for his carelessness condemned him to give the peasant a cow for the calf which had run away .
and now the little peasant and his wife had the cow for which they had so long wished , and they were heartily glad , but they had no food for it , and could give it nothing to eat , so it soon had to be killed .
they salted the flesh , and the peasant went into the town and wanted to sell the skin there , so that he might buy a new calf with the proceeds .
on the way he passed by a mill , and there sat a raven with broken wings , and out of pity he took him and wrapped him in the skin .
but as the weather grew so bad and there was a storm of rain and wind , he could go no farther , and turned back to the mill and begged for shelter .
the miller"s wife was alone in the house , and said to the peasant : " lay yourself on the straw there , " and gave him a slice of bread and cheese .
the peasant ate it , and lay down with his skin beside him , and the woman thought : " he is tired and has gone to sleep . "
in the meantime came the parson ; the miller"s wife received him well , and said : " my husband is out , so we will have a feast . "
the peasant listened , and when he heard them talk about feasting he was vexed that he had been forced to make shift with a slice of bread and cheese .
then the woman served up four different things , roast meat , salad , cakes , and wine .
just as they were about to sit down and eat , there was a knocking outside .
the woman said : " oh , heavens !
it is my husband ! " she quickly hid the roast meat inside the tiled stove , the wine under the pillow , the salad on the bed , the cakes under it , and the parson in the closet on the porch .
then she opened the door for her husband , and said : " thank heaven , you are back again !
there is such a storm , it looks as if the world were coming to an end . "
the miller saw the peasant lying on the straw , and asked , " what is that fellow doing there ? "
" ah , " said the wife , " the poor knave came in the storm and rain , and begged for shelter , so i gave him a bit of bread and cheese , and showed him where the straw was . "
the man said : " i have no objection , but be quick and get me something to eat . "
the woman said : " but i have nothing but bread and cheese . "
" i am contented with anything , " replied the husband , " so far as i am concerned , bread and cheese will do , " and looked at the peasant and said : " come and eat some more with me . "
the peasant did not require to be invited twice , but got up and ate .
after this the miller saw the skin in which the raven was , lying on the ground , and asked : " what have you there ? "
the peasant answered : " i have a soothsayer inside it . "
" can he foretell anything to me ? " said the miller .
" why not ? " answered the peasant : " but he only says four things , and the fifth he keeps to himself . "
the miller was curious , and said : " let him foretell something for once . "
then the peasant pinched the raven"s head , so that he croaked and made a noise like krr , krr .
the miller said : " what did he say ? "
the peasant answered : " in the first place , he says that there is some wine hidden under the pillow . "
" bless me ! " cried the miller , and went there and found the wine .
" now go on , " said he .
the peasant made the raven croak again , and said : " in the second place , he says that there is some roast meat in the tiled stove . "
" upon my word ! " cried the miller , and went thither , and found the roast meat .
the peasant made the raven prophesy still more , and said : " thirdly , he says that there is some salad on the bed . "
" that would be a fine thing ! " cried the miller , and went there and found the salad .
at last the peasant pinched the raven once more till he croaked , and said : " fourthly , he says that there are some cakes under the bed . "
" that would be a fine thing ! " cried the miller , and looked there , and found the cakes .
and now the two sat down to the table together , but the miller"s wife was frightened to death , and went to bed and took all the keys with her .
the miller would have liked much to know the fifth , but the little peasant said : " first , we will quickly eat the four things , for the fifth is something bad . "
so they ate , and after that they bargained how much the miller was to give for the fifth prophecy , until they agreed on three hundred talers .
then the peasant once more pinched the raven"s head till he croaked loudly .
the miller asked : " what did he say ? "
the peasant replied : " he says that the devil is hiding outside there in the closet on the porch . "
the miller said : " the devil must go out , " and opened the house-door ; then the woman was forced to give up the keys , and the peasant unlocked the closet .
the parson ran out as fast as he could , and the miller said : " it was true ; i saw the black rascal with my own eyes . "
the peasant , however , made off next morning by daybreak with the three hundred talers .
at home the small peasant gradually launched out ; he built a beautiful house , and the peasants said : " the small peasant has certainly been to the place where golden snow falls , and people carry the gold home in shovels . "
then the small peasant was brought before the mayor , and bidden to say from whence his wealth came .
he answered : " i sold my cow"s skin in the town , for three hundred talers . "
when the peasants heard that , they too wished to enjoy this great profit , and ran home , killed all their cows , and stripped off their skins in order to sell them in the town to the greatest advantage .
the mayor , however , said : " but my servant must go first . "
when she came to the merchant in the town , he did not give her more than two talers for a skin , and when the others came , he did not give them so much , and said : " what can i do with all these skins ? "
then the peasants were vexed that the small peasant should have thus outwitted them , wanted to take vengeance on him , and accused him of this treachery before the mayor .
the innocent little peasant was unanimously sentenced to death , and was to be rolled into the water , in a barrel pierced full of holes .
he was led forth , and a priest was brought who was to say a mass for his soul .
the others were all obliged to retire to a distance , and when the peasant looked at the priest , he recognized the man who had been with the miller"s wife .
he said to him : " i set you free from the closet , set me free from the barrel . "
at this same moment up came , with a flock of sheep , the very shepherd whom the peasant knew had long been wishing to be mayor , so he cried with all his might : " no , i will not do it ; if the whole world insists on it , i will not do it ! "
the shepherd hearing that , came up to him , and asked : " what are you about ?
what is it that you will not do ? "
the peasant said : " they want to make me mayor , if i will but put myself in the barrel , but i will not do it . "
the shepherd said : " if nothing more than that is needful in order to be mayor , i would get into the barrel at once . "
the peasant said : " if you will get in , you will be mayor . "
the shepherd was willing , and got in , and the peasant shut the top down on him ; then he took the shepherd"s flock for himself , and drove it away .
the parson went to the crowd , and declared that the mass had been said .
then they came and rolled the barrel towards the water .
when the barrel began to roll , the shepherd cried : " i am quite willing to be mayor . "
they believed no otherwise than that it was the peasant who was saying this , and answered : " that is what we intend , but first you shall look about you a little down below there , " and they rolled the barrel down into the water .
after that the peasants went home , and as they were entering the village , the small peasant also came quietly in , driving a flock of sheep and looking quite contented .
then the peasants were astonished , and said : " peasant , from whence do you come ?
have you come out of the water ? "
" yes , truly , " replied the peasant , " i sank deep , deep down , until at last i got to the bottom ; i pushed the bottom out of the barrel , and crept out , and there were pretty meadows on which a number of lambs were feeding , and from thence i brought this flock away with me . "
said the peasants : " are there any more there ? "
" oh , yes , " said he , " more than i could want . "
then the peasants made up their minds that they too would fetch some sheep for themselves , a flock apiece , but the mayor said : " i come first . "
so they went to the water together , and just then there were some of the small fleecy clouds in the blue sky , which are called little lambs , and they were reflected in the water , whereupon the peasants cried : " we already see the sheep down below ! "
the mayor pressed forward and said : " i will go down first , and look about me , and if things promise well i"ll call you . "
so he jumped in ; splash ! went the water ; it sounded as if he were calling them , and the whole crowd plunged in after him as one man .
then the entire village was dead , and the small peasant , as sole heir , became a rich man .
there was once a man called frederick : he had a wife whose name was catherine , and they had not long been married .
one day frederick said .
" kate !
i am going to work in the fields ; when i come back i shall be hungry so let me have something nice cooked , and a good draught of ale . "
" very well , " said she , " it shall all be ready . "
when dinner-time drew nigh , catherine took a nice steak , which was all the meat she had , and put it on the fire to fry .
the steak soon began to look brown , and to crackle in the pan ; and catherine stood by with a fork and turned it : then she said to herself , " the steak is almost ready , i may as well go to the cellar for the ale . "
so she left the pan on the fire and took a large jug and went into the cellar and tapped the ale cask .
the beer ran into the jug and catherine stood looking on .
at last it popped into her head , " the dog is not shut up--he may be running away with the steak ; that"s well thought of . "
so up she ran from the cellar ; and sure enough the rascally cur had got the steak in his mouth , and was making off with it .
away ran catherine , and away ran the dog across the field : but he ran faster than she , and stuck close to the steak .
" it"s all gone , and " what can"t be cured must be endured " , " said catherine .
so she turned round ; and as she had run a good way and was tired , she walked home leisurely to cool herself .
now all this time the ale was running too , for catherine had not turned the cock ; and when the jug was full the liquor ran upon the floor till the cask was empty .
when she got to the cellar stairs she saw what had happened .
" my stars ! " said she , " what shall i do to keep frederick from seeing all this slopping about ? "
so she thought a while ; and at last remembered that there was a sack of fine meal bought at the last fair , and that if she sprinkled this over the floor it would suck up the ale nicely .
" what a lucky thing , " said she , " that we kept that meal ! we have now a good use for it . "
so away she went for it : but she managed to set it down just upon the great jug full of beer , and upset it ; and thus all the ale that had been saved was set swimming on the floor also .
" ah ! well , " said she , " when one goes another may as well follow . "
then she strewed the meal all about the cellar , and was quite pleased with her cleverness , and said , " how very neat and clean it looks ! "
at noon frederick came home .
" now , wife , " cried he , " what have you for dinner ? "
" o frederick ! " answered she , " i was cooking you a steak ; but while i went down to draw the ale , the dog ran away with it ; and while i ran after him , the ale ran out ; and when i went to dry up the ale with the sack of meal that we got at the fair , i upset the jug : but the cellar is now quite dry , and looks so clean ! "
" kate , kate , " said he , " how could you do all this ? "
why did you leave the steak to fry , and the ale to run , and then spoil all the meal ? "
" why , frederick , " said she , " i did not know i was doing wrong ; you should have told me before . "
the husband thought to himself , " if my wife manages matters thus , i must look sharp myself . "
now he had a good deal of gold in the house : so he said to catherine , " what pretty yellow buttons these are !
i shall put them into a box and bury them in the garden ; but take care that you never go near or meddle with them " " no , frederick , " said she , " that i never will . "
as soon as he was gone , there came by some pedlars with earthenware plates and dishes , and they asked her whether she would buy .
" oh dear me , i should like to buy very much , but i have no money : if you had any use for yellow buttons , i might deal with you . "
" yellow buttons ! " said they : " let us have a look at them " " go into the garden and dig where i tell you , and you will find the yellow buttons : i dare not go myself . "
so the rogues went : and when they found what these yellow buttons were , they took them all away , and left her plenty of plates and dishes .
then she set them all about the house for a show : and when frederick came back , he cried out , " kate , what have you been doing ? "
" see , " said she , " i have bought all these with your yellow buttons : but i did not touch them myself ; the pedlars went themselves and dug them up . "
" wife , wife , " said frederick , " what a pretty piece of work you have made ! those yellow buttons were all my money : how came you to do such a thing ? "
" why , " answered she , " i did not know there was any harm in it ; you should have told me . "
catherine stood musing for a while , and at last said to her husband , " hark ye , frederick , we will soon get the gold back : let us run after the thieves . "
" well , we will try , " answered he ; " but take some butter and cheese with you , that we may have something to eat by the way . "
" very well , " said she ; and they set out : and as frederick walked the fastest , he left his wife some way behind .
" it does not matter , " thought she : " when we turn back , i shall be so much nearer home than he . "
presently she came to the top of a hill , down the side of which there was a road so narrow that the cart wheels always chafed the trees on each side as they passed .
" ah , see now , " said she , " how they have bruised and wounded those poor trees ; they will never get well . "
so she took pity on them , and made use of the butter to grease them all , so that the wheels might not hurt them so much .
while she was doing this kind office one of her cheeses fell out of the basket , and rolled down the hill .
catherine looked , but could not see where it had gone ; so she said , " well , i suppose the other will go the same way and find you ; he has younger legs than i have . "
then she rolled the other cheese after it ; and away it went , nobody knows where , down the hill .
but she said she supposed that they knew the road , and would follow her , and she could not stay there all day waiting for them at last she overtook frederick , who desired her to give him something to eat .
then she gave him the dry bread .
" where are the butter and cheese ? " said he .
" oh ! " answered she , " i used the butter to grease those poor trees that the wheels chafed so : and one of the cheeses ran away so i sent the other after it to find it , and i suppose they are both on the road together somewhere . "
" what a goose you are to do such silly things ! " said the husband .
" how can you say so ? " said she ; " i am sure you never told me not . "
they ate the dry bread together ; and frederick said , " kate , i hope you locked the door safe when you came away . "
" no , " answered she , " you did not tell me . "
" then go home , and do it now before we go any farther , " said frederick , " and bring with you something to eat . "
catherine did as he told her , and thought to herself by the way , " frederick wants something to eat ; but i don"t think he is very fond of butter and cheese : i"ll bring him a bag of fine nuts , and the vinegar , for i have often seen him take some . "
when she reached home , she bolted the back door , but the front door she took off the hinges , and said , " frederick told me to lock the door , but surely it can nowhere be so safe if i take it with me . "
so she took her time by the way ; and when she overtook her husband she cried out , " there , frederick , there is the door itself , you may watch it as carefully as you please . "
" alas ! alas ! " said he , " what a clever wife i have !
i sent you to make the house fast , and you take the door away , so that everybody may go in and out as they please--however , as you have brought the door , you shall carry it about with you for your pains . "
" very well , " answered she , " i"ll carry the door ; but i"ll not carry the nuts and vinegar bottle also--that would be too much of a load ; so if you please , i"ll fasten them to the door . "
frederick of course made no objection to that plan , and they set off into the wood to look for the thieves ; but they could not find them : and when it grew dark , they climbed up into a tree to spend the night there .
scarcely were they up , than who should come by but the very rogues they were looking for .
they were in truth great rascals , and belonged to that class of people who find things before they are lost ; they were tired ; so they sat down and made a fire under the very tree where frederick and catherine were .
frederick slipped down on the other side , and picked up some stones .
then he climbed up again , and tried to hit the thieves on the head with them : but they only said , " it must be near morning , for the wind shakes the fir-apples down . "
catherine , who had the door on her shoulder , began to be very tired ; but she thought it was the nuts upon it that were so heavy : so she said softly , " frederick , i must let the nuts go . "
" no , " answered he , " not now , they will discover us . "
" i can"t help that : they must go . "
" well , then , make haste and throw them down , if you will . "
then away rattled the nuts down among the boughs and one of the thieves cried , " bless me , it is hailing . "
a little while after , catherine thought the door was still very heavy : so she whispered to frederick , " i must throw the vinegar down . "
" pray don"t , " answered he , " it will discover us . "
" i can"t help that , " said she , " go it must . "
so she poured all the vinegar down ; and the thieves said , " what a heavy dew there is ! "
at last it popped into catherine"s head that it was the door itself that was so heavy all the time : so she whispered , " frederick , i must throw the door down soon . "
but he begged and prayed her not to do so , for he was sure it would betray them " here goes , however , " said she : and down went the door with such a clatter upon the thieves , that they cried out " murder ! " and not knowing what was coming , ran away as fast as they could , and left all the gold .
so when frederick and catherine came down , there they found all their money safe and sound .
there was once upon a time a woman who was a real witch and had two daughters , one ugly and wicked , and this one she loved because she was her own daughter , and one beautiful and good , and this one she hated , because she was her stepdaughter .
the stepdaughter once had a pretty apron , which the other fancied so much that she became envious , and told her mother that she must and would have that apron .
" be quiet , my child , " said the old woman , " and you shall have it .
your stepsister has long deserved death ; tonight when she is asleep i will come and cut her head off .
only be careful that you are at the far side of the bed , and push her well to the front . "
it would have been all over with the poor girl if she had not just then been standing in a corner , and heard everything .
all day long she dared not go out of doors , and when bedtime had come , the witch"s daughter got into bed first , so as to lie at the far side , but when she was asleep , the other pushed her gently to the front , and took for herself the place at the back , close by the wall .
in the night , the old woman came creeping in , she held an axe in her right hand , and felt with her left to see if anyone were lying at the outside , and then she grasped the axe with both hands , and cut her own child"s head off .
when she had gone away , the girl got up and went to her sweetheart , who was called roland , and knocked at his door .
when he came out , she said to him : " listen , dearest roland , we must fly in all haste ; my stepmother wanted to kill me , but has struck her own child .
when daylight comes , and she sees what she has done , we shall be lost . "
" but , " said roland , " i counsel you first to take away her magic wand , or we cannot escape if she pursues us . "
the maiden fetched the magic wand , and she took the dead girl"s head and dropped three drops of blood on the ground , one in front of the bed , one in the kitchen , and one on the stairs .
then she hurried away with her lover .
when the old witch got up next morning , she called her daughter , and wanted to give her the apron , but she did not come .
then the witch cried : " where are you ? "
" here , on the stairs , i am sweeping , " answered the first drop of blood .
the old woman went out , but saw no one on the stairs , and cried again : " where are you ? "
" here in the kitchen , i am warming myself , " cried the second drop of blood .
she went into the kitchen , but found no one .
then she cried again : " where are you ? "
" ah , here in the bed , i am sleeping , " cried the third drop of blood .
she went into the room to the bed .
what did she see there ?
her own child , whose head she had cut off , bathed in her blood .
the witch fell into a passion , sprang to the window , and as she could look forth quite far into the world , she perceived her stepdaughter hurrying away with her sweetheart roland .
" that shall not help you , " cried she , " even if you have got a long way off , you shall still not escape me . "
she put on her many-league boots , in which she covered an hour"s walk at every step , and it was not long before she overtook them the girl , however , when she saw the old woman striding towards her , changed , with her magic wand , her sweetheart roland into a lake , and herself into a duck swimming in the middle of it .
the witch placed herself on the shore , threw breadcrumbs in , and went to endless trouble to entice the duck ; but the duck did not let herself be enticed , and the old woman had to go home at night as she had come .
at this the girl and her sweetheart roland resumed their natural shapes again , and they walked on the whole night until daybreak .
then the maiden changed herself into a beautiful flower which stood in the midst of a briar hedge , and her sweetheart roland into a fiddler .
it was not long before the witch came striding up towards them , and said to the musician : " dear musician , may i pluck that beautiful flower for myself ? "
" oh , yes , " he replied , " i will play to you while you do it . "
as she was hastily creeping into the hedge and was just going to pluck the flower , knowing perfectly well who the flower was , he began to play , and whether she would or not , she was forced to dance , for it was a magical dance .
the faster he played , the more violent springs was she forced to make , and the thorns tore her clothes from her body , and pricked her and wounded her till she bled , and as he did not stop , she had to dance till she lay dead on the ground .
as they were now set free , roland said : " now i will go to my father and arrange for the wedding . "
" then in the meantime i will stay here and wait for you , " said the girl , " and that no one may recognize me , i will change myself into a red stone landmark . "
then roland went away , and the girl stood like a red landmark in the field and waited for her beloved .
but when roland got home , he fell into the snares of another , who so fascinated him that he forgot the maiden .
the poor girl remained there a long time , but at length , as he did not return at all , she was sad , and changed herself into a flower , and thought : " someone will surely come this way , and trample me down . "
it befell , however , that a shepherd kept his sheep in the field and saw the flower , and as it was so pretty , plucked it , took it with him , and laid it away in his chest .
from that time forth , strange things happened in the shepherd"s house .
when he arose in the morning , all the work was already done , the room was swept , the table and benches cleaned , the fire in the hearth was lighted , and the water was fetched , and at noon , when he came home , the table was laid , and a good dinner served .
he could not conceive how this came to pass , for he never saw a human being in his house , and no one could have concealed himself in it .
he was certainly pleased with this good attendance , but still at last he was so afraid that he went to a wise woman and asked for her advice .
the wise woman said : " there is some enchantment behind it , listen very early some morning if anything is moving in the room , and if you see anything , no matter what it is , throw a white cloth over it , and then the magic will be stopped . "
the shepherd did as she bade him , and next morning just as day dawned , he saw the chest open , and the flower come out .
swiftly he sprang towards it , and threw a white cloth over it .
instantly the transformation came to an end , and a beautiful girl stood before him , who admitted to him that she had been the flower , and that up to this time she had attended to his house-keeping .
she told him her story , and as she pleased him he asked her if she would marry him , but she answered : " no , " for she wanted to remain faithful to her sweetheart roland , although he had deserted her .
nevertheless , she promised not to go away , but to continue keeping house for the shepherd .
and now the time drew near when roland"s wedding was to be celebrated , and then , according to an old custom in the country , it was announced that all the girls were to be present at it , and sing in honour of the bridal pair .
when the faithful maiden heard of this , she grew so sad that she thought her heart would break , and she would not go thither , but the other girls came and took her .
when it came to her turn to sing , she stepped back , until at last she was the only one left , and then she could not refuse .
but when she began her song , and it reached roland"s ears , he sprang up and cried : " i know the voice , that is the true bride , i will have no other ! "
everything he had forgotten , and which had vanished from his mind , had suddenly come home again to his heart .
then the faithful maiden held her wedding with her sweetheart roland , and grief came to an end and joy began .
it was the middle of winter , when the broad flakes of snow were falling around , that the queen of a country many thousand miles off sat working at her window .
the frame of the window was made of fine black ebony , and as she sat looking out upon the snow , she pricked her finger , and three drops of blood fell upon it .
then she gazed thoughtfully upon the red drops that sprinkled the white snow , and said , " would that my little daughter may be as white as that snow , as red as that blood , and as black as this ebony windowframe ! "
and so the little girl really did grow up ; her skin was as white as snow , her cheeks as rosy as the blood , and her hair as black as ebony ; and she was called snowdrop .
but this queen died ; and the king soon married another wife , who became queen , and was very beautiful , but so vain that she could not bear to think that anyone could be handsomer than she was .
she had a fairy looking-glass , to which she used to go , and then she would gaze upon herself in it , and say : " tell me , glass , tell me true !
of all the ladies in the land , who is fairest , tell me , who ? "
and the glass had always answered : " thou , queen , art the fairest in all the land . "
but snowdrop grew more and more beautiful ; and when she was seven years old she was as bright as the day , and fairer than the queen herself .
then the glass one day answered the queen , when she went to look in it as usual : " thou , queen , art fair , and beauteous to see , but snowdrop is lovelier far than thee ! "
when she heard this she turned pale with rage and envy , and called to one of her servants , and said , " take snowdrop away into the wide wood , that i may never see her any more . "
then the servant led her away ; but his heart melted when snowdrop begged him to spare her life , and he said , " i will not hurt you , thou pretty child . "
so he left her by herself ; and though he thought it most likely that the wild beasts would tear her in pieces , he felt as if a great weight were taken off his heart when he had made up his mind not to kill her but to leave her to her fate , with the chance of someone finding and saving her .
then poor snowdrop wandered along through the wood in great fear ; and the wild beasts roared about her , but none did her any harm in the evening she came to a cottage among the hills , and went in to rest , for her little feet would carry her no further .
everything was spruce and neat in the cottage : on the table was spread a white cloth , and there were seven little plates , seven little loaves , and seven little glasses with wine in them ; and seven knives and forks laid in order ; and by the wall stood seven little beds .
as she was very hungry , she picked a little piece of each loaf and drank a very little wine out of each glass ; and after that she thought she would lie down and rest .
so she tried all the little beds ; but one was too long , and another was too short , till at last the seventh suited her : and there she laid herself down and went to sleep .
by and by in came the masters of the cottage .
now they were seven little dwarfs , that lived among the mountains , and dug and searched for gold .
they lighted up their seven lamps , and saw at once that all was not right .
the first said , " who has been sitting on my stool ? "
the second , " who has been eating off my plate ? "
the third , " who has been picking my bread ? "
the fourth , " who has been meddling with my spoon ? "
the fifth , " who has been handling my fork ? "
the sixth , " who has been cutting with my knife ? "
the seventh , " who has been drinking my wine ? "
then the first looked round and said , " who has been lying on my bed ? "
and the rest came running to him , and everyone cried out that somebody had been upon his bed .
but the seventh saw snowdrop , and called all his brethren to come and see her ; and they cried out with wonder and astonishment and brought their lamps to look at her , and said , " good heavens ! what a lovely child she is ! "
and they were very glad to see her , and took care not to wake her ; and the seventh dwarf slept an hour with each of the other dwarfs in turn , till the night was gone .
in the morning snowdrop told them all her story ; and they pitied her , and said if she would keep all things in order , and cook and wash and knit and spin for them , she might stay where she was , and they would take good care of her .
then they went out all day long to their work , seeking for gold and silver in the mountains : but snowdrop was left at home ; and they warned her , and said , " the queen will soon find out where you are , so take care and let no one in . "
but the queen , now that she thought snowdrop was dead , believed that she must be the handsomest lady in the land ; and she went to her glass and said : " tell me , glass , tell me true !
of all the ladies in the land , who is fairest , tell me , who ? "
and the glass answered : " thou , queen , art the fairest in all this land : but over the hills , in the greenwood shade , where the seven dwarfs their dwelling have made , there snowdrop is hiding her head ; and she is lovelier far , o queen ! than thee . "
then the queen was very much frightened ; for she knew that the glass always spoke the truth , and was sure that the servant had betrayed her .
and she could not bear to think that anyone lived who was more beautiful than she was ; so she dressed herself up as an old pedlar , and went her way over the hills , to the place where the dwarfs dwelt .
then she knocked at the door , and cried , " fine wares to sell ! "
snowdrop looked out at the window , and said , " good day , good woman ! what have you to sell ? "
" good wares , fine wares , " said she ; " laces and bobbins of all colours . "
" i will let the old lady in ; she seems to be a very good sort of body , " thought snowdrop , as she ran down and unbolted the door .
" bless me ! " said the old woman , " how badly your stays are laced !
let me lace them up with one of my nice new laces . "
snowdrop did not dream of any mischief ; so she stood before the old woman ; but she set to work so nimbly , and pulled the lace so tight , that snowdrop"s breath was stopped , and she fell down as if she were dead .
" there"s an end to all thy beauty , " said the spiteful queen , and went away home .
in the evening the seven dwarfs came home ; and i need not say how grieved they were to see their faithful snowdrop stretched out upon the ground , as if she was quite dead .
however , they lifted her up , and when they found what ailed her , they cut the lace ; and in a little time she began to breathe , and very soon came to life again .
then they said , " the old woman was the queen herself ; take care another time , and let no one in when we are away . "
when the queen got home , she went straight to her glass , and spoke to it as before ; but to her great grief it still said : " thou , queen , art the fairest in all this land : but over the hills , in the greenwood shade , where the seven dwarfs their dwelling have made , there snowdrop is hiding her head ; and she is lovelier far , o queen ! than thee . "
then the blood ran cold in her heart with spite and malice , to see that snowdrop still lived ; and she dressed herself up again , but in quite another dress from the one she wore before , and took with her a poisoned comb .
when she reached the dwarfs " cottage , she knocked at the door , and cried , " fine wares to sell ! "
but snowdrop said , " i dare not let anyone in . "
then the queen said , " only look at my beautiful combs ! " and gave her the poisoned one .
and it looked so pretty , that she took it up and put it into her hair to try it ; but the moment it touched her head , the poison was so powerful that she fell down senseless .
" there you may lie , " said the queen , and went her way .
but by good luck the dwarfs came in very early that evening ; and when they saw snowdrop lying on the ground , they thought what had happened , and soon found the poisoned comb .
and when they took it away she got well , and told them all that had passed ; and they warned her once more not to open the door to anyone .
meantime the queen went home to her glass , and shook with rage when she read the very same answer as before ; and she said , " snowdrop shall die , if it cost me my life . "
so she went by herself into her chamber , and got ready a poisoned apple : the outside looked very rosy and tempting , but whoever tasted it was sure to die .
then she dressed herself up as a peasant"s wife , and travelled over the hills to the dwarfs " cottage , and knocked at the door ; but snowdrop put her head out of the window and said , " i dare not let anyone in , for the dwarfs have told me not . "
" do as you please , " said the old woman , " but at any rate take this pretty apple ; i will give it you . "
" no , " said snowdrop , " i dare not take it . "
" you silly girl ! " answered the other , " what are you afraid of ?
do you think it is poisoned ?
come ! do you eat one part , and i will eat the other . "
now the apple was so made up that one side was good , though the other side was poisoned .
then snowdrop was much tempted to taste , for the apple looked so very nice ; and when she saw the old woman eat , she could wait no longer .
but she had scarcely put the piece into her mouth , when she fell down dead upon the ground .
" this time nothing will save thee , " said the queen ; and she went home to her glass , and at last it said : " thou , queen , art the fairest of all the fair . "
and then her wicked heart was glad , and as happy as such a heart could be .
when evening came , and the dwarfs had gone home , they found snowdrop lying on the ground : no breath came from her lips , and they were afraid that she was quite dead .
they lifted her up , and combed her hair , and washed her face with wine and water ; but all was in vain , for the little girl seemed quite dead .
so they laid her down upon a bier , and all seven watched and bewailed her three whole days ; and then they thought they would bury her : but her cheeks were still rosy ; and her face looked just as it did while she was alive ; so they said , " we will never bury her in the cold ground . "
and they made a coffin of glass , so that they might still look at her , and wrote upon it in golden letters what her name was , and that she was a king"s daughter .
and the coffin was set among the hills , and one of the dwarfs always sat by it and watched .
and the birds of the air came too , and bemoaned snowdrop ; and first of all came an owl , and then a raven , and at last a dove , and sat by her side .
and thus snowdrop lay for a long , long time , and still only looked as though she was asleep ; for she was even now as white as snow , and as red as blood , and as black as ebony .
at last a prince came and called at the dwarfs " house ; and he saw snowdrop , and read what was written in golden letters .
then he offered the dwarfs money , and prayed and besought them to let him take her away ; but they said , " we will not part with her for all the gold in the world . "
at last , however , they had pity on him , and gave him the coffin ; but the moment he lifted it up to carry it home with him , the piece of apple fell from between her lips , and snowdrop awoke , and said , " where am i ? "
and the prince said , " thou art quite safe with me . "
then he told her all that had happened , and said , " i love you far better than all the world ; so come with me to my father"s palace , and you shall be my wife . "
and snowdrop consented , and went home with the prince ; and everything was got ready with great pomp and splendour for their wedding .
to the feast was asked , among the rest , snowdrop"s old enemy the queen ; and as she was dressing herself in fine rich clothes , she looked in the glass and said : " tell me , glass , tell me true !
of all the ladies in the land , who is fairest , tell me , who ? "
and the glass answered : " thou , lady , art loveliest here , i ween ; but lovelier far is the new-made queen . "
when she heard this she started with rage ; but her envy and curiosity were so great , that she could not help setting out to see the bride .
and when she got there , and saw that it was no other than snowdrop , who , as she thought , had been dead a long while , she choked with rage , and fell down and died : but snowdrop and the prince lived and reigned happily over that land many , many years ; and sometimes they went up into the mountains , and paid a visit to the little dwarfs , who had been so kind to snowdrop in her time of need .
there was once upon a time a queen to whom god had given no children .
every morning she went into the garden and prayed to god in heaven to bestow on her a son or a daughter .
then an angel from heaven came to her and said : " be at rest , you shall have a son with the power of wishing , so that whatsoever in the world he wishes for , that shall he have . "
then she went to the king , and told him the joyful tidings , and when the time was come she gave birth to a son , and the king was filled with gladness .
every morning she went with the child to the garden where the wild beasts were kept , and washed herself there in a clear stream it happened once when the child was a little older , that it was lying in her arms and she fell asleep .
then came the old cook , who knew that the child had the power of wishing , and stole it away , and he took a hen , and cut it in pieces , and dropped some of its blood on the queen"s apron and on her dress .
then he carried the child away to a secret place , where a nurse was obliged to suckle it , and he ran to the king and accused the queen of having allowed her child to be taken from her by the wild beasts .
when the king saw the blood on her apron , he believed this , fell into such a passion that he ordered a high tower to be built , in which neither sun nor moon could be seen and had his wife put into it , and walled up .
here she was to stay for seven years without meat or drink , and die of hunger .
but god sent two angels from heaven in the shape of white doves , which flew to her twice a day , and carried her food until the seven years were over .
the cook , however , thought to himself : " if 